8102
yaM
71
]GL.sc[
3v04820.9071:viXra
A Brief Introduction to Machine
Learning for Engineers
(2018), “A Brief Introduction to Machine Learning for Engineers”, :
Vol. XX, No. XX, pp 1–231. DOI: XXX.
Osvaldo Simeone
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
osvaldo.simeone@kcl.ac.uk
Contents
I Basics 5
1 Introduction 6
1.1 What is Machine Learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2 When to Use Machine Learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.3 Goals and Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression 15
2.1 Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2 Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3 Frequentist Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4 Bayesian Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.5 Minimum Description Length (MDL)∗ . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.6 Information-Theoretic Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
2.7 Interpretation and Causality∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
2.8 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3 Probabilistic Models for Learning 51
3.1 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2 The Exponential Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.3 Frequentist Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
3.4 Bayesian Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
3.5 Supervised Learning via Generalized Linear Models (GLM) 69
3.6 Maximum Entropy Property∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
3.7 Energy-based Models∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
3.8 Some Advanced Topics∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
3.9 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
II Supervised Learning 75
4 Classification 76
4.1 Preliminaries: Stochastic Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . 77
4.2 Classification as a Supervised Learning Problem . . . . . . 78
4.3 Discriminative Deterministic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
4.4 DiscriminativeProbabilisticModels:GeneralizedLinearMod-
els . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
4.5 Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Beyond GLM . . . . . 96
4.6 Generative Probabilistic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
4.7 Boosting∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
4.8 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
5 Statistical Learning Theory∗ 113
5.1 A Formal Framework for Supervised Learning . . . . . . . 114
5.2 PAC Learnability and Sample Complexity . . . . . . . . . . 119
5.3 PAC Learnability for Finite Hypothesis Classes . . . . . . . 120
5.4 VC Dimension and Fundamental Theorem of PAC Learning 124
5.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
III Unsupervised Learning 129
6 Unsupervised Learning 130
6.1 Unsupervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
6.2 K-Means Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
6.3 ML, ELBO and EM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
6.4 Directed Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
6.5 Undirected Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
6.6 Discriminative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
6.7 Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
6.8 Ranking∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
6.9 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
IV Advanced Modelling and Inference 165
7 Probabilistic Graphical Models 166
7.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
7.2 Bayesian Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
7.3 Markov Random Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
7.4 Bayesian Inference in Probabilistic Graphical Models . . . . 182
7.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185
8 Approximate Inference and Learning 186
8.1 Monte Carlo Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187
8.2 Variational Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
8.3 Monte Carlo-Based Variational Inference∗ . . . . . . . . . 197
8.4 Approximate Learning∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
8.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
V Conclusions 202
9 Concluding Remarks 203
Appendices 206
A Appendix A: Information Measures 207
A.1 Entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
A.2 Conditional Entropy and Mutual Information . . . . . . . . 210
A.3 Divergence Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
B Appendix B: KL Divergence and Exponential Family 215
Acknowledgements 217
References 218
A Brief Introduction to Machine
Learning for Engineers
Osvaldo Simeone1
1Department of Informatics, King’s College London;
osvaldo.simeone@kcl.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This monograph aims at providing an introduction to key
concepts,algorithms,andtheoreticalresultsinmachinelearn-
ing. The treatment concentrates on probabilistic models
for supervised and unsupervised learning problems. It in-
troduces fundamental concepts and algorithms by building
on first principles, while also exposing the reader to more
advanced topics with extensive pointers to the literature,
withinaunifiednotationandmathematicalframework.The
materialisorganizedaccordingtoclearlydefinedcategories,
such as discriminative and generative models, frequentist
and Bayesian approaches, exact and approximate inference,
as well as directed and undirected models. This monograph
is meant as an entry point for researchers with an engineer-
ing background in probability and linear algebra.
ISSN; DOI XXXXXXXX
(cid:13)c2018 XXXXXXXX
Notation
Random variables or random vectors – both abbreviated as rvs
•
– are represented using roman typeface, while their values and realiza-
tions are indicated by the corresponding standard font. For instance,
the equality x = x indicates that rv x takes value x.
Matrices are indicated using uppercase fonts, with roman type-
•
face used for random matrices.
Vectors will be taken to be in column form.
•
XT and X† are the transpose and the pseudoinverse of matrix X,
•
respectively.
The distribution of a rv x, either probability mass function (pmf)
•
for a discrete rv or probability density function (pdf) for continuous
rvs, is denoted as p , p (x), or p(x).
x x
The notation x p indicates that rv x is distributed according
x
• ∼
to p .
x
For jointly distributed rvs (x,y) p , the conditional distribu-
xy
• ∼
tion of x given the observation y = y is indicated as p , p (xy)
x|y=y x|y
|
or p(xy).
|
The notation x y = y p indicates that rv x is drawn ac-
x|y=y
• | ∼
cording to the conditional distribution p .
x|y=y
The notation E [] indicates the expectation of the argument
•
x∼px
·
with respect to the distribution of the rv x p . Accordingly, we will
x
∼
also write E [ y] for the conditional expectation with respect to
x∼p
x|y ·|
the distribution p . When clear from the context, the distribution
x|y=y
over which the expectation is computed may be omitted.
The notation Pr [] indicates the probability of the argument
•
x∼px
·
event with respect to the distribution of the rv x p . When clear
x
∼
1
2 Notation
from the context, the subscript is dropped.
The notation log represents the logarithm in base two, while ln
•
represents the natural logarithm.
x (µ,Σ) indicates that random vector x is distributedaccord-
• ∼ N
ing to a multivariate Gaussian pdf with mean vector µ and covariance
matrix Σ. The multivariate Gaussian pdf is denoted as (xµ,Σ) as a
N |
function of x.
x (a,b) indicates that rv x is distributed according to a uni-
• ∼ U
form distribution in the interval [a,b]. The corresponding uniform pdf
is denoted as (xa,b).
U |
δ(x) denotes the Dirac delta function or the Kronecker delta func-
•
tion, as clear from the context.
a 2 = N a2 is the quadratic, or l , norm of a vector a =
• || || i=1 i 2
[a ,...,a ]T. We similarly define the l norm as a = N a , and
1 N P 1 || || 1 i=1| i |
the l pseudo-norm a as the number of non-zero entries of vector a.
0 || || 0 P
I denotestheidentity matrix,whosedimensionswillbeclearfrom
•
the context. Similarly, 1 represents a vector of all ones.
R is the set of real numbers; R+ the set of non-negative real num-
•
bers; R− the set of non-positive real numbers; and RN is the set of all
vectors of N real numbers.
1( ) is the indicator function: 1(x)= 1 if x is true, and 1(x)= 0
• ·
otherwise.
represents the cardinality of a set .
• |S| S
x represents a set of rvs x indexed by the integers k .
S k
• ∈ S
Acronyms
AI: Artificial Intelligence
AMP: Approximate Message Passing
BN: Bayesian Network
DAG: Directed Acyclic Graph
ELBO: Evidence Lower BOund
EM: Expectation Maximization
ERM: Empirical Risk Minimization
GAN: Generative Adversarial Network
GLM: Generalized Linear Model
HMM: Hidden Markov Model
i.i.d.: independent identically distributed
KL: Kullback-Leibler
LASSO: Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator
LBP: Loopy Belief Propagation
LL: Log-Likelihood
LLR: Log-Likelihood Ratio
LS: Least Squares
MC: Monte Carlo
MCMC: Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MDL: Minimum Description Length
MFVI: Mean Field Variational Inference
ML: Maximum Likelihood
MRF: Markov Random Field
NLL: Negative Log-Likelihood
PAC: Probably Approximately Correct
pdf: probability density function
3
4 Acronyms
pmf: probability mass function
PCA: Principal Component Analysis
PPCA: Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis
QDA: Quadratic Discriminant Analysis
RBM: Restricted Boltzmann Machine
SGD: Stochastic Gradient Descent
SVM: Support Vector Machine
rv: random variable or random vector (depending on the context)
s.t.: subject to
VAE: Variational AutoEncoder
VC: Vapnik–Chervonenkis
VI: Variational Inference
Part I
Basics
1
Introduction
Having taught courses on machine learning, I am often asked by col-
leagues and students with a background in engineering to suggest “the
best place to start” to get into this subject. I typically respond with a
list of books – for a general, but slightly outdated introduction, read
this book; for a detailed survey of methods based on probabilistic mod-
els, check this other reference; to learn about statistical learning, I
found this text useful; and so on. This answer strikes me, and most
likely also my interlocutors, as quite unsatisfactory. This is especially
so since the size of many of these books may be discouraging for busy
professionals and students working on other projects. This monograph
is an attempt to offer a basic and compact reference that describes key
ideas and principles in simple terms and within a unified treatment,
encompassing also more recent developments and pointers to the liter-
ature for further study.
1.1 What is Machine Learning?
A useful way to introduce the machine learning methodology is by
means of a comparison with the conventional engineering design flow.
6
1.1. What is Machine Learning? 7
This starts with a in-depth analysis of the problem domain, which cul-
minates with the definition of a mathematical model. The mathemat-
ical model is meant to capture the key features of the problem under
study, and is typically the result of the work of a number of experts.
The mathematical model is finally leveraged to derive hand-crafted so-
lutions to the problem.
For instance, consider the problem of defining a chemical process
to produce a given molecule. The conventional flow requires chemists
to leverage their knowledge of models that predict the outcome of indi-
vidual chemical reactions, in order to craft a sequence of suitable steps
that synthesize the desired molecule. Another example is the design
of speech translation or image/ video compression algorithms. Both of
these tasks involve the definition of models and algorithms by teams
of experts, such as linguists, psychologists, and signal processing prac-
titioners, not infrequently during the course of long standardization
meetings.
The engineering design flow outlined above may be too costly and
inefficient for problems in which faster or less expensive solutions are
desirable. The machine learning alternative is to collect large data sets,
e.g., of labelled speech, images or videos, and to use this information
to train general-purpose learning machines to carry out the desired
task. While the standard engineering flow relies on domain knowledge
and on design optimized for the problem at hand, machine learning
lets large amounts of data dictate algorithms and solutions. To this
end, rather than requiring a precise model of the set-up under study,
machine learning requires the specification of an objective, of a model
to be trained, and of an optimization technique.
Returning to the first example above, a machine learning approach
would proceed by training a general-purpose machine to predict the
outcome of known chemical reactions based on a large data set, and
by then using the trained algorithm to explore ways to produce more
complex molecules. In a similar manner, large data sets of images or
videos wouldbeusedtotrainageneral-purposealgorithm withtheaim
of obtaining compressed representations from which the original input
can be recovered with some distortion.
8 Introduction
1.2 When to Use Machine Learning?
Based on the discussion above, machine learning can offer an efficient
alternative totheconventional engineeringflowwhendevelopment cost
and time are the main concerns, or when the problem appears to be
too complex to be studied in its full generality. On the flip side, the
approach has the key disadvantages of providing generally suboptimal
performance, or hinderinginterpretability of the solution, and to apply
only to a limited set of problems.
In order to identify tasks for which machine learning methods may
be useful, reference [31] suggests the following criteria:
1. thetask involves a functionthat mapswell-defined inputsto well-
defined outputs;
2. large data sets exist or can be created containing input-output
pairs;
3. the task provides clear feedback with clearly definable goals and
metrics;
4. the task does not involve long chains of logic or reasoning that
depend on diverse background knowledge or common sense;
5. the task does not require detailed explanations for how the deci-
sion was made;
6. thetask hasatolerance forerrorandnoneedforprovablycorrect
or optimal solutions;
7. the phenomenon or function being learned should not change
rapidly over time; and
8. no specialized dexterity, physical skills, or mobility is required.
These criteria are useful guidelines for the decision of whether machine
learningmethodsaresuitableforagiventaskofinterest.Theyalsooffer
a convenient demarcation line between machine learning as is intended
today,withitsfocusontrainingandcomputationalstatistics tools,and
more general notions of Artificial Intelligence (AI) based on knowledge
and common sense [87] (see [126] for an overview on AI research).
1.2. When to Use Machine Learning? 9
1.2.1 Learning Tasks
We can distinguish among three different main types of machine learn-
ing problems, which are briefly introduced below. The discussion re-
flects the focus of this monograph on parametric probabilistic models,
as further elaborated on in the next section.
1. Supervised learning: We have N labelled training examples
= (x ,t ) N , where x represents a covariate, or explanatory vari-
D { n n }n=1 n
able, while t is the corresponding label, or response. For instance,
n
variable x may represent the text of an email, while the label t may
n n
be a binary variable indicating whether the email is spam or not. The
goal of supervised learning is to predict the value of the label t for
an input x that is not in the training set. In other words, supervised
learning aims at generalizing the observations in the data set to new
D
inputs. For example, an algorithm trained on a set of emails should be
able to classify a new email not present in the data set .
D
We can generally distinguish between classification problems, in
which the label t is discrete, as in the example above, and regression
problems, in which variable t is continuous. An example of a regression
task is the prediction of tomorrow’s temperature t based on today’s
meteorological observations x.
An effective way to learn a predictor is to identify from the data
set a predictive distribution p(t x) from a set of parametrized distri-
D |
butions. The conditional distribution p(t x) defines a profile of beliefs
|
over all possible of the label t given the input x. For instance, for tem-
perature prediction, one could learn mean and variance of a Gaussian
distribution p(t x) as a function of the input x. As a special case, the
|
output of a supervised learning algorithm may be in the form of a
deterministic predictive function t = tˆ(x).
2. Unsupervised learning: Suppose now that we have an un-
labelled set of training examples = x N . Less well defined than
D { n }n=1
supervised learning, unsupervised learning generally refers to the task
of learning properties of the mechanism that generates this data set.
Specific tasks and applications include clustering, which is the prob-
lem of grouping similar examples x ; dimensionality reduction, feature
n
extraction, and representation learning, all related to the problem of
10 Introduction
representing the data in a smaller or more convenient space; and gen-
erative modelling, which is the problem of learning a generating mech-
anism to produce artificial examples that are similar to available data
in the data set .
D
As a generalization of both supervised and unsupervised learning,
semi-supervised learning refers to scenarios in which not all examples
arelabelled, with theunlabelled examples providinginformation about
the distribution of the covariates x.
3. Reinforcement learning:Reinforcementlearningreferstothe
problem of inferring optimal sequential decisions based on rewards or
punishments received as a result of previous actions. Under supervised
learning, the “label” t refers to an action to be taken when the learner
is in an informational state about the environment given by a variable
x. Upon taking an action t in a state x, the learner is provided with
feedback on the immediate reward accrued via this decision, and the
environmentmoves ontoadifferentstate.Asanexample,anagent can
betrained to navigate a given environment in the presence of obstacles
by penalizing decisions that result in collisions.
Reinforcementlearningishenceneithersupervised,sincethelearner
isnotprovidedwiththeoptimalactionsttoselectinagivenstatex;nor
is itfullyunsupervised,given theavailability of feedback onthequality
of the chosen action. Reinforcement learning is also distinguished from
supervised and unsupervised learning due to the influence of previous
actions on future states and rewards.
This monograph focuses on supervised and unsupervised learning.
These general tasks can be further classified along the following dimen-
sions.
Passive vs. active learning: A passive learner is given the train-
•
ing examples, while an active learner can affect the choice of training
examples on the basis of prior observations.
Offline vs. online learning: Offline learning operates over a batch
•
oftrainingsamples,whileonlinelearningprocessessamplesinastream-
ing fashion. Note that reinforcement learning operates inherently in an
online manner, while supervised and unsupervised learning can be car-
ried out by following either offline or online formulations.
1.3. Goals and Outline 11
This monograph considers only passive and offline learning.
1.3 Goals and Outline
This monograph aims at providing an introduction to key concepts, al-
gorithms, and theoretical results in machine learning. The treatment
concentrates on probabilistic models for supervised and unsupervised
learning problems. It introduces fundamental concepts and algorithms
by building on first principles, while also exposing the reader to more
advanced topics with extensive pointers to the literature, within a uni-
fied notation and mathematical framework. Unlike other texts that are
focused on one particular aspect of the field, an effort has been made
here to provide a broad but concise overview in which the main ideas
and techniques are systematically presented. Specifically, the material
is organized according to clearly defined categories, such as discrim-
inative and generative models, frequentist and Bayesian approaches,
exact and approximate inference, as well as directed and undirected
models. This monograph is meant as an entry point for researchers
with a background in probability and linear algebra. A prior exposure
to information theory is useful but not required.
Detailed discussions are provided on basic concepts and ideas, in-
cluding overfitting and generalization, Maximum Likelihood and regu-
larization, and Bayesian inference. The text also endeavors to provide
intuitive explanations and pointers to advanced topics and research di-
rections. Sections and subsections containing more advanced material
that may be skipped at a first reading are marked with a star ( ).
∗
Thereaderwillfindhereneither discussionsoncomputingplatform
or programming frameworks, such as map-reduce, nor details on spe-
cific applications involving large data sets. These can be easily found
in a vast and growing body of work. Furthermore, rather than provid-
ing exhaustive details on the existing myriad solutions in each specific
category, techniques have been selected that are useful to illustrate the
most salient aspects. Historical notes have also been provided only for
a few selected milestone events.
Finally, the monograph attempts to strike a balance between the
algorithmic and theoretical viewpoints. In particular, all learning al-
12 Introduction
gorithms are introduced on the basis of theoretical arguments, often
based on information-theoretic measures. Moreover, a chapter is de-
voted to statistical learning theory, demonstrating how to set the field
of supervised learning on solid theoretical foundations. This chapter
is more theoretically involved than the others, and proofs of some key
results are included in order to illustrate the theoretical underpinnings
of learning. This contrasts with other chapters, in which proofs of the
few theoretical results are kept at a minimum in order to focus on the
main ideas.
Therestofthemonographisorganizedintofiveparts.Thefirstpart
covers introductory material. Specifically, Chapter 2 introduces the fre-
quentist, Bayesian and Minimum Description Length (MDL) learning
frameworks; the discriminative and generative categories of probabilis-
tic models; as well as key concepts such as training loss, generalization,
andoverfitting–allinthecontextofasimplelinearregressionproblem.
Information-theoretic metrics are also briefly introduced, as well as the
advanced topics of interpretation and causality. Chapter 3 then pro-
vides an introduction to the exponential family of probabilistic models,
to Generalized Linear Models (GLMs), and to energy-based models,
emphasizing main properties that will be invoked in later chapters.
The second part concerns supervised learning. Chapter 4 covers lin-
ear and non-linear classification methods via discriminative and gen-
erative models, including Support Vector Machines (SVMs), kernel
methods, logistic regression, multi-layer neural networks and boosting.
Chapter 5 is a brief introduction to the statistical learning framework
of the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) theory, covering the
Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension and the fundamental theorem
of PAC learning.
The third part, consisting of a single chapter, introduced unsuper-
vised learning. In particular, in Chapter 6, unsupervised learning mod-
els are described by distinguishing among directed models, for which
Expectation Maximization (EM) is derived as the iterative maximiza-
tion of the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO); undirected models, for
which Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are discussed as a rep-
resentative example; discriminative models trained using the InfoMax
1.3. Goals and Outline 13
principle; and autoencoders. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
are also introduced.
The fourth part covers more advanced modelling and inference ap-
proaches. Chapter 7provides an introduction to probabilisticgraphical
models, namely Bayesian Networks (BNs) and Markov Random Fields
(MRFs), as means to encode more complex probabilistic dependencies
than the models studied in previous chapters. Approximate inference
andlearningmethodsareintroducedinChapter8byfocusingonMonte
Carlo (MC) and Variational Inference (VI) techniques. The chapter
briefly introduces in a unified way techniques such as variational EM,
Variational AutoEncoders (VAE), and black-box inference. Some con-
cluding remarks are provided in the last part, consisting of Chapter
9.
We conclude this chapter by emphasizing the importance of prob-
ability as a common language for the definition of learning algorithms
[34]. The centrality of the probabilistic viewpoint was not always rec-
ognized, but has deep historical roots. This is demonstrated by the
following two quotes, the first from the first AI textbook published by
P. H. Winston in 1977, and the second from an unfinished manuscript
by J. von Neumann (see [126, 64] for more information).
“ManyancientGreekssupportedSocratesopinionthatdeep,
inexplicable thoughts came from the gods. Today’s equiva-
lent to those gods is the erratic, even probabilistic neuron.
It is more likely that increased randomnessof neuralbehav-
ior is the problem of the epileptic and the drunk, not the
advantage of the brilliant.”
from Artificial Intelligence, 1977.
“All of this will lead to theories of computation which are
much less rigidly of an all-or-none nature than past and
present formal logic... There are numerous indications to
make us believe that this new system of formal logic will
moveclosertoanotherdisciplinewhichhasbeenlittlelinked
in the past with logic. This is thermodynamics primarily in
the form it was received from Boltzmann.”
14 Introduction
from The Computer and the Brain, 1958.
2
A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
In this chapter, we introduce the frequentist, Bayesian and MDL learn-
ing frameworks, as well as key concepts in supervised learning, such as
discriminative and generative models,training loss, generalization, and
overfitting. This is done by considering a simple linear regression prob-
lem as a recurring example. We start by introducing the problem of su-
pervised learning and by presenting some background on inference. We
thenpresentthefrequentist,Bayesian andMDLlearningapproachesin
this order. The treatment of MDL is limited to an introductory discus-
sion,astherestofmonographconcentrates onfrequentistandBayesian
viewpoints. We conclude with an introduction to the important topic
of information-theoretic metrics, and with a brief introduction to the
advanced topics of causal inference and interpretation.
2.1 Supervised Learning
In the standard formulation of a supervised learning problem, we are
givenatrainingset containingN trainingpoints(x ,t ),n = 1,...,N.
n n
D
The observations x are considered to be free variables, and known as
n
covariates, domain points, or explanatory variables; while the target
15
16 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
variables t are assumed to be dependent on x and are referred to
n n
as dependent variables, labels, or responses. An example is illustrated
in Fig. 2.1. We use the notation x = (x ,....,x )T for the covariates
D 1 N
and t = (t ,....,t )T for the labels in the training set . Based on
D 1 N
D
this data, the goal of supervised learning is to identify an algorithm
to predict the label t for a new, that is, as of yet unobserved, domain
point x.
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Figure 2.1: ExampleofatrainingsetD withN =10points(x ,t ),n=1,...,N.
n n
Theoutlinedlearningtaskisclearly impossibleintheabsenceofad-
ditional information on themechanism relating variables xandt. With
reference to Fig. 2.1, unless we assume, say, that x and t are related by
a function t = f(x) with some properties, such as smoothness, we have
noway ofpredictingthelabeltforanunobserveddomainpointx.This
observation is formalized by the no free lunch theorem to be reviewed
inChapter5:onecannotlearnrulesthatgeneralize tounseenexamples
withoutmakingassumptionsaboutthemechanismgeneratingthedata.
The set of all assumptions made by the learning algorithm is known as
the inductive bias.
This discussion points to a key difference between memorizing and
learning. While the former amounts to mere retrieval of a value t
n
2.2. Inference 17
correspondingtoanalreadyobserved pair(x ,t ) ,learningentails
n n
∈ D
the capability to predict the value t for an unseen domain point x.
Learning, in other words, converts experience – in the form of – into
D
expertise or knowledge – in the form of a predictive algorithm. This is
well captured by the following quote by Jorge Luis Borges: “To think
is to forget details, generalize, make abstractions.” [138].
By and large, the goal of supervisedlearning is that of identifying a
predictive algorithm that minimizes thegeneralization loss, that is, the
error in the prediction of a new label t for an unobserved explanatory
variable x. How exactly to formulate this problem, however, depends
on one’s viewpoint on the nature of the model that is being learned.
This leads to the distinction between the frequentist and the Bayesian
approaches,whichiscentraltothischapter.Asitwillbealsodiscussed,
the MDL philosophy deviates from the mentioned focus on prediction
as the goal of learning, by targeting instead a parsimoniousdescription
of the data set .
D
2.2 Inference
Before we start our discussion of learning, it is useful to review some
basic concepts concerning statistical inference, as they will be needed
throughout this chapter and in the rest of this monograph. We specif-
ically consider the inference problem of predicting a rv t given the
observation of another rv x under the assumption that their joint dis-
tribution p(x,t) is known. As a matter of terminology, it is noted that
here we will use the term “inference” as it is typically intended in the
literature on probabilistic graphical models (see, e.g., [81]), hence di-
vergingfromitsuseinotherbranchesofthemachinelearningliterature
(see, e.g., [23]).
In order to define the problem of optimal inference, one starts by
defining a non-negative loss function ℓ(t,tˆ). This defines the cost, or
loss or risk, incurred when the correct value is t while the estimate is tˆ.
An important example is the ℓ loss
q
ℓ (t,tˆ)= t tˆq, (2.1)
q
| − |
whichincludesasaspecialcasethequadratic loss ℓ (t,tˆ)= (t tˆ)2,and
2
−
18 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
the0-1 loss, or detection error, ℓ (t,tˆ)= t tˆ ,where a = 1if a= 0
0 0 0
| − | | | 6
and a = 0 otherwise. Once a loss function is selected, the optimal
0
| |
prediction tˆ(x) for a given value of the observation x is obtained by
minimizing the so-called generalization risk or generalization loss1
L (tˆ)= E [ℓ(t,tˆ(x))]. (2.2)
p (x,t)∼pxt
The notation L emphasizes the dependence of the generalization loss
p
on the distribution p(x,t).
The solution of this problem is given by the optimal prediction or
decision rule2
tˆ∗(x) = argminE [ℓ(t,tˆ)x]. (2.3)
t∼p
tˆ t|x |
ThiscanbeseenbyusingthelawofiteratedexpectationsE [] =
(x,t)∼pxt
·
E [E [ x]]. Equation (2.3) shows that the optimal estimate, or
x∼px t∼p
t|x ·|
prediction, tˆ∗(x) is a function of the posterior distribution p(t x) of the
|
label given the domain point x and of the loss function ℓ. Therefore,
once the posterior p(t x) is known, one can evaluate the optimal pre-
|
diction (2.3) for any desired loss function, without the need to know
the joint distribution p(x,t).
As a special case of (2.3), with the quadratic loss function ℓ , the
2
optimal prediction is the conditional mean tˆ∗(x) = E [tx]; while
t∼p
t|x |
for the 0-1 loss function ℓ , the optimal decision is the mode of the
0
posterior distribution, i.e., tˆ∗(x) = argmax p(t x).
t
|
For example, assume that we have
tx = x 0.8δ(t x)+0.2δ(t+x), (2.4)
| ∼ −
so that, conditioned on the event x = x, t equals x with probability
0.8 and x with probability 0.2. The optimal prediction is tˆ∗(x) =
−
0.8x 0.2x = 0.6x for the quadratic loss, while it is tˆ∗(x) = x for the
−
0-1 loss.
1Thetermgeneralization errororpopulationerrorarealsooftenused,butthey
will not beadopted in this monograph.
2Theoptimalestimate(2.3)isalsoknownasBayes’predictionorBayes’rule,but
herewewill not usethisterminology in ordertoavoid confusion with theBayesian
approach discussed below.
2.3. Frequentist Approach 19
Thegoal ofsupervisedlearningmethodsisbroadlyspeakingthatof
obtaining a predictor tˆ(x) that performs close to the optimal predictor
tˆ∗(x), based only on the training set , and hence without knowledge
D
of the joint distribution p(x,t). The closeness in performance is mea-
sured by the difference between the generalization loss L (tˆ) achieved
p
by the trained predictor and the minimum generalization loss L (tˆ∗) of
p
the optimal predictor, which depends on the true distribution p(x,t).
Strictly speaking, this statement applies only for the frequentist ap-
proach, which is discussed next. As it will be explained later in the
chapter, in fact, while the Bayesian approach still centers around the
goalofprediction,itsmodellingassumptionsaredifferent.Furthermore,
theMDLapproachconcentrates onthetask ofdatacompressionrather
than prediction.
2.3 Frequentist Approach
Accordingtothefrequentistviewpoint,thetrainingdatapoints(x ,t )
n n
∈
are independentidentically distributed(i.i.d.) rvsdrawnfrom atrue,
D
and unknown, distribution p(x,t):
(x ,t ) p(x,t), i= 1,...,N. (2.5)
n n
i.∼i.d.
The new observation (x,t) is also independently generated from the
same true distribution p(x,t); the domain point x is observed and the
label t must be predicted. Since the probabilistic model p(x,t) is not
known, one cannot solve directly problem (2.3) to find the optimal
prediction that minimizes the generalization loss L in (2.2).
p
Before discussingtheavailable solutions to this problem,itis worth
observing that the definition of the “true” distribution p(x,t) depends
in practice on the way data is collected. As in the example of the
“beauty AI” context, if the rankings t assigned to pictures x of faces
n n
are affected by racial biases, the distribution p(x,t) will reflect these
prejudices and produce skewed results [62].
Taxonomy of solutions. There are two main ways to address the
problem of learning how to perform inference when not knowing the
distribution p(x,t):
20 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
Separate learning and (plug-in) inference: Learn first an approx-
•
imation, say p (t x), of the conditional distribution p(t x) based on
D
| |
the data , and then plug this approximation in (2.3) to obtain an
D
approximation of the optimal decision as
tˆ (x) = argminE [ℓ(t,tˆ)x]. (2.6)
D
tˆ
t∼pD(t|x)
|
Direct inference via Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM): Learn
•
directly an approximation tˆ () of the optimal decision rule by mini-
D
·
mizing an empirical estimate of the generalization loss (2.2) obtained
from the data set as
tˆ () = argminL (tˆ), (2.7)
D D
· tˆ
where the empirical risk, or empirical loss, is
N
1
L (tˆ) = ℓ(t ,tˆ(x )). (2.8)
D n n
N
n=1
X
The notation L (tˆ) highlights the dependence of the empirical loss on
D
the predictor tˆ() and on the training set .
· D
Inpractice, as wewillsee, bothapproaches optimize asetof param-
eters that define the probabilistic model or the predictor. Furthermore,
the first approach is generally more flexible, since having an estimate
p (t x) of the posterior distribution p(t x) allows the prediction (2.6)
D
| |
to be computed for any loss function. In contrast, the ERM solution
(2.7) is tied to a specific choice of the loss function ℓ. In the rest of this
section, we will start by taking the first approach, and discuss later
how this relates to the ERM formulation.
Linear regression example. For concreteness, in the following,
we will consider the following running example inspired by [23]. In the
example, data is generated according to the true distribution p(x,t) =
p(x)p(t x), where x (0,1) and
| ∼ U
tx = x (sin(2πx),0.1). (2.9)
| ∼ N
Thetraining set in Fig. 2.1 was generated from this distribution.If this
true distribution were known, the optimal predictor under the ℓ loss
2
2.3. Frequentist Approach 21
would be equal to the conditional mean
tˆ∗(x) = sin(2πx). (2.10)
Hence, the minimum generalization loss is L (tˆ∗)= 0.1.
p
It is emphasized that, while we consider this running example in
order to fix the ideas, all the definitions and ideas reported in this
chapter apply more generally to supervised learning problems. This
will be further discussed in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5.
2.3.1 Discriminative vs. Generative Probabilistic Models
Inordertolearnanapproximationp (t x)ofthepredictivedistribution
D
|
p(t x) based on the data , we will proceed by first selecting a family
| D
of parametric probabilistic models, also known as a hypothesis class,
and by then learning the parameters of the model to fit (in a sense to
be made precise later) the data .
D
Consider as an example the linear regression problem introduced
above. We start by modelling the label t as a polynomial function
of the domain point x added to a Gaussian noise with variance β−1.
Parameter β is the precision, i.e., the inverse variance of the additive
noise. The polynomial function with degree M can be written as
M
µ(x,w) = w xj = wTφ(x), (2.11)
j
j=0
X
where we have defined the weight vector w = [w w w ]T and the
0 1 M
···
feature vectorφ(x) = [1 x x2 xM]T.Thevectorwdefinestherelative
···
weight of the powers in the sum (2.11). This assumption corresponds
to adopting a parametric probabilistic model p(t x,θ) defined as
|
tx = x (µ(x,w),β−1), (2.12)
| ∼ N
with parameters θ = (w,β). Having fixed this hypothesis class, the
parameter vector θ can be then learned from the data , as it will be
D
discussed.
In the example above, we have parametrized the posterior distribu-
tion. Alternatively, we can parametrize, and learn, the full joint distri-
bution p(x,t). These two alternatives are introduced below.
22 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
1. Discriminative probabilistic model. With this first class of
models, the posterior, or predictive, distribution p(t x) is assumed to
|
belong to a hypothesis class p(t x,θ) defined by a parameter vector θ.
|
The parameter vector θ is learned from the data set . For a given
D
parameter vector θ, the conditional distribution p(t x,θ) allows the
|
different values of the label t to be discriminated on the basis of their
posterior probability. In particular, once the model is learned, one can
directly compute the predictor (2.6) for any loss function.
As an example, for the linear regression problem, once a vector of
parameters θ = (w ,β ) is identified based on the data during
D D D
D
learning, the optimal prediction under the ℓ loss is the conditional
2
mean tˆ (x) = E [tx], that is, tˆ (x) =µ(x,w ).
D t∼p(t|x,θD)
|
D D
2. Generative probabilistic model. Instead of learning directly
the posterior p(t x), one can model the joint distribution p(x,t) as
|
being part of a parametric family p(x,t θ). Note that, as opposed to
|
discriminative models, the joint distribution p(x,t θ) models also the
|
distribution of the covariates x. Accordingly, the term “generative” re-
flects the capacity of this type of models to generate a realization of
the covariates x by using the marginal p(xθ).
|
Once the joint distribution p(x,t θ) is learned from the data, one
|
can compute the posterior p(t x,θ) using Bayes’ theorem, and, from
|
it, the optimal predictor (2.6) can be evaluated for any loss function.
Generative models make stronger assumptions by modeling also the
distribution of the explanatory variables. As a result, an improper se-
lection of the model may lead to more significant bias issues. However,
there are potential advantages, such as the ability to deal with missing
data or latent variables, such as in semi-supervised learning. We refer
to Chapter 6 for further discussion (see also [23]).
In the rest of this section, for concreteness, we consider discrimi-
native probabilistic models p(t x,θ), although the main definitions will
|
apply also to generative models.
2.3.2 Model Order and Model Parameters
In the linear regression example, the selection of the hypothesis class
(2.12) required the definition of the polynomial degree M, while the
2.3. Frequentist Approach 23
determination of a specific model p(t x,θ) in the class called for the
|
selection of the parameter vector θ = (w,β). As we will see, these two
types of variables play a significantly different role during learning and
should be clearly distinguished, as discussed next.
1. Model order M (and hyperparameters): The model order
defines the “capacity” of the hypothesis class, that is, the number of
thedegrees of freedom in themodel. Thelarger M is, themorecapable
amodelistofittheavailable data.Forinstance,inthelinearregression
example, the model order determines the size of the weight vector w.
More generally, variables that define the class of models to be learned
are known as hyperparameters. As we will see, determining the model
order,andmorebroadlythehyperparameters,requiresaprocessknown
as validation.
2. Model parameters θ: Assigning specific values to the model
parameters θ identifies a hypothesis within the given hypothesis class.
This can be done by using learning criteria such as Maximum Likeli-
hood (ML) and Maximum a Posteriori (MAP).
We postpone a discussion of validation to the next section, and we
start by introducing the ML and MAP learning criteria.
2.3.3 Maximum Likelihood (ML) Learning
AssumenowthatthemodelorderM isfixed,andthatweareinterested
in learning the model parameters θ.The ML criterion selects a value of
θ underwhichthetrainingset hasthemaximumprobabilityof being
D
observed. In other words, the value θ selected by ML is the most likely
to have generated the observed training set. Note that there might be
more than one such value.
To proceed, we need to write the probability (density) of the ob-
served labels t in the training set given the corresponding domain
D
D
points x. Under the assumed discriminative model, this is given as
N
p(t x ,w,β) = p(t x ,w,β), (2.13)
D D n n
| |
n=1
Y
N
= (t µ(x ,w),β−1)
n n
N |
n=1
Y
24 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
where we have used the independence of different data points. Taking
the logarithm yields the Log-Likelihood (LL) function
N
lnp(t x ,w,β) = lnp(t x ,w,β)
D D n n
| |
n=1
X
N
β N β
= - (µ(x ,w) t )2+ ln . (2.14)
n n
2 − 2 2π
n=1
X
The LL function should be considered as a function of the model pa-
rameters θ = (w,β), since the data set is fixed and given. The ML
D
learning problem is defined by the minimization of the Negative LL
(NLL) function as
N
1
min lnp(t x ,w,β). (2.15)
n n
w,β −N |
n=1
X
This criterion is also referred to as cross-entropy or log-loss, as further
discussed in Sec. 2.6.
If one is only interested in learning only the posterior mean, as is
thecasewhenthelossfunctionisℓ ,thenonecantackleproblem(2.14)
2
only over the weights w, yielding the optimization
N
1
minL (w) = (µ(x ,w) t )2. (2.16)
D n n
w N −
n=1
X
The quantity L (w) is known as the training loss. An interesting ob-
D
servation is that this criterion coincides with the ERM problem (2.7)
for the ℓ loss if one parametrizes the predictor as tˆ(x) = µ(x,w).
2
The ERM problem (2.16) can be solved in closed form. To this end,
we write the empirical loss as L (w) = N−1 t X w 2, with the
D D D
|| − ||
N (M +1) matrix
×
X = [φ(x ) φ(x ) φ(x )]T. (2.17)
D 1 2 N
···
Its minimization hence amounts to a Least Squares (LS) problem,
which yields the solution
w = (XTX )−1XTt , (2.18)
ML D D D D
2.3. Frequentist Approach 25
Note that, in (2.18), we have assumed the typical overdetermined case
in which the inequality N > (M +1) holds. More generally, one has
†
the ML solution w = X t . Finally, differentiating the NLL with
ML D D
respect to β yields instead the ML estimate
1
= L (w ). (2.19)
D ML
β
ML
3
2 M= 9
1
M= 1
0
-1
-2 M= 3
-3
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Figure 2.2: IllustrationofunderfittingandoverfittinginMLlearning:Thedashed
lineistheoptimalpredictor(2.10),whichdependsontheunknowntruedistribution,
while the other lines correspond to the predictor tˆ (x) = µ(x,w ) learned via
ML ML
ML with different model orders M.
Overfitting and Underfitting. Adopting the ℓ loss, let us now
2
compare the predictor tˆ (x) = µ(x,w ) learned via ML with the
ML ML
optimal, but unknown, predictor tˆ∗(x) in (2.10). To this end, Fig. 2.2
shows the optimal predictor tˆ∗(x) as a dashed line and the ML-based
predictor tˆ (x) obtained with different values of the model order M
ML
for the training set in Fig. 2.1 (also shown in Fig. 2.2 for reference).
D
We begin by observing that, with M = 1, the ML predictor under-
fits the data: the model is not rich enough to capture the variations
present in the data. As a result, the training loss L (w ) in (2.16) is
D ML
large.
26 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
In contrast, with M = 9, the ML predictor overfits the data: the
model is too rich and, in order to account for the observations in the
training set, it yields inaccurate predictions outside it. In this case, the
training loss L (w) in (2.16) is small, but the generalization loss
D
L (w ) = E [ℓ(t,µ(x,w ))] (2.20)
p ML (x,t)∼pxt ML
is large. With overfitting, the model is memorizing the training set,
rather than learning how to generalize to unseen examples.
The choice M = 3 appears to be the best by comparison with the
optimal predictor. Note that this observation is in practice precluded
given the impossibility to determine tˆ∗(x) and hence the generalization
loss.Wewilldiscussbelowhowtoestimatethegeneralization lossusing
validation.
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ssol
derauqs
egareva
toor
underfitting overfitting
generalization
(via validation)
training
Figure2.3: SquarerootofthegeneralizationlossL (w )andofthetrainingloss
p ML
L (w ) as a function of themodel order M for thetraining dataset in Fig. 2.1.
D ML
The impact of the model order M on training and generalization
losses isfurtherelaborated on inFig.2.3,whichshowsthesquaredroot
ofthegeneralization lossL (w )andofthetraininglossL (w )as
p ML D ML
a function of M for the same training data set. A first remark is that,
as expected, the training loss is smaller than the generalization loss,
2.3. Frequentist Approach 27
since the latter accounts for all pairs (x,t) p(x,t), while the former
∼
includes only the training points used for learning. More importantly,
the key observation here is that increasing M allows one to better fit –
and possibly overfit – the training set, hence reducing L (w ). The
D ML
generalization loss L (w ) instead tends to decrease at first, as we
p ML
move away from the underfitting regime, but it eventually increases
for sufficiently large M. The widening of the gap between training and
generalization providesevidencethatoverfitting isoccurring.From Fig.
2.3, we can hence conclude that, in this example, model orders larger
than M = 7 should be avoided since they lead to overfitting, while
model order less than M = 3 should also not be considered in order to
avoid underfitting.
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
ssol
citardauq
egareva
toor
generalization (via validation)
M= 1
M= 7
training
Figure2.4: SquarerootofthegeneralizationlossL (w )andofthetrainingloss
p ML
L (w ) as a function of the training set size N. The asymptote of the general-
D ML
ization and training losses is given by the minimum generalization loss L (w∗) (cf.
p
(2.21)) achievable for thegiven model order (see Fig. 2.5).
What if we had more data?Extrapolatingfromthebehaviorob-
served in Fig. 2.2,we can surmisethat, as thenumberN of data points
increases,overfittingisavoidedevenforlargevaluesofM.Infact,when
the training set is big as compared to the number of parameters in θ,
28 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
we expect the training loss L (w) to provide an accurate measure of
D
the generalization loss L (w) for all possible values of w. Informally,
p
we have the approximation L (w) L (w) simultaneously for all val-
D p
≃
ues of w as long as N is large enough. Therefore, the weight vector
w that minimizes the training loss L (w) also (approximately) min-
ML D
imizes the generalization loss L (w). It follows that, for large N, the
p
ML parameter vector w tends to the the optimal value w∗ (assum-
ML
ing for simplicity of argument that it is unique) that minimizes the
generalization loss among all predictors in the model, i.e.,
w∗ = argmin L (w). (2.21)
p
w
This discussion will be made precise in Chapter 5.
To offer numerical evidence for the point just made, Fig. 2.4 plots
the (square root of the) generalization and training losses versus N,
where the training sets were generated at random from the true distri-
bution. From the figure, we can make the following important observa-
tions. First, overfitting – as measured by the gap between training and
generalization losses –vanishesas N increases.Thisisaconsequenceof
the discussed approximate equalities L (w) L (w) and w w∗,
D p ML
≃ ≃
which are valid as N grows large, which imply the approximate equali-
ties L (w ) L (w ) L (w∗).
D ML p ML p
≃ ≃
Second, it is noted that the training loss L (w ) tends to the
D ML
minimumgeneralization loss L (w∗) for the given M from below, while
p
the generalization loss L (w ) tends to it from above. This is be-
p ML
cause, as N increases, it becomes more difficult to fit the data set ,
D
and hence L (w ) increases. Conversely, as N grows large, the ML
D ML
estimate becomes more accurate, because of the increasingly accurate
approximation w w∗, and thus the generalization loss L (w )
ML p ML
≃
decreases.
Third,selecting a smaller model order M yields an improved gener-
alization loss whenthetrainingsetis small,whilealarger valueofM is
desirablewhenthedatasetisbigger.Infact,asfurtherdiscussedbelow,
when N is small, the estimation error caused by overfitting dominates
the bias caused by the choice of a small hypothesis class. In contrast,
forsufficiently largetrainingsets,theestimation errorvanishesandthe
2.3. Frequentist Approach 29
performance is dominated by the bias induced by the selection of the
model.
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
ssol
citardauq
egareva
toor
estimation error
bias
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the bias and training error based on the decomposition
(2.22).
Bias and generalization gap. The previous paragraph intro-
duced the notions of estimation error and bias associated with the
selection of a given model order M. While Chapter 5 will provide a
more extensive discussion on these concepts, it is useful to briefly re-
viewthemhereinthecontextofMLlearning.Estimationerrorandbias
refer to the following decomposition of the generalization loss achieved
by the given solution w
ML
L (w ) = L (tˆ∗)+(L (w∗) L (tˆ∗))+(L (w ) L (w∗)). (2.22)
p ML p p p p ML p
− −
This decomposition is illustrated in Fig. 2.5 for M = 1. In (2.22),
the term L (tˆ∗) = 0.1 (the figure shows the square root) is, as seen,
p
the minimum achievable generalization loss without any constraint on
the hypothesis class. The term (L (w∗) L (tˆ∗)) represents the bias,
p p
−
or approximation error, caused by the choice of the given hypothesis
class, and hence also by the choice of M. This is because, by (2.21),
30 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
L (w∗) is the best generalization loss for the given model. Recall that
p
the loss L (w∗) can be achieved when N is large enough. Finally, the
p
term(L (w ) L (w∗))istheestimation error or generalization gap3
p ML p
−
that is incurred due to the fact that N is not large enough and hence
we have w = w∗.
ML
6
From the decomposition (2.22), a large N allows us to reduce the
estimation error,butithasnoeffectonthebias.ThisisseeninFig.2.4,
wheretheasymptote achieved by thegeneralization loss as N increases
equals the minimum generalization loss L (w∗) for the given model
p
order.ChoosingasmallvalueofM intheregimeoflargedataimposesa
floor on the achievable generalization loss that noamount ofadditional
data can overcome.
Validation and testing. In the discussion above, it was assumed
that the generalization loss L (w) can somehow be evaluated. Since
p
this dependon the trueunknowndistributionp(x,t), this evaluation is,
strictly speaking,notpossible.How then to estimate thegeneralization
loss in order to enable model order selection using a plot as in Fig. 2.3?
The standard solution is to use validation.
Themostbasicformofvalidationprescribesthedivisionoftheavail-
able data into two sets: a hold-out, or validation, set and the training
set. The validation set is used to evaluate an approximation of the
generalization loss L (w) via the empirical average
p
1
Nv
L (w) ℓ(t ,µ(x ,w)), (2.23)
p n n
≃ N
v n=1
X
where the sum is done over the N elements of the validation set.
v
Thejustdescribedhold-outapproachtovalidationhasacleardraw-
back, as part of the available data needs to be set aside and not used
for training. This means that the number of examples that can be
used for training is smaller than the number of overall available data
points. To partially obviate this problem, a more sophisticated, and
commonly used, approach to validation is k-fold cross-validation. With
this method, the available data points are partitioned, typically at ran-
dom, into k equally sized subsets. The generalization loss is then esti-
3This is also defined as generalization error in some references.
2.3. Frequentist Approach 31
mated by averaging k different estimates. Each estimate is obtained by
retaining one of the k subsets for validation and the remaining k 1
−
subsets for training. When k = N, this approach is also known as
leave-one-out cross-validation.
Test set.OnceamodelorderM andmodelparametersθhavebeen
obtained via learning and validation, one typically needs to produce
an estimate of the generalization loss obtained with this choice (M,θ).
Thegeneralization loss estimated viavalidation cannot beusedfor this
purpose.In fact, the validation loss tends to besmaller than the actual
value of the generalization loss. After all, we have selected the model
ordersoastoyieldthesmallestpossibleerroronthevalidationset.The
upshot is that the final estimate of the generalization loss should be
doneonaseparatesetofdatapoints,referredtoasthetest set,thatare
set aside for this purpose and not used at any stage of learning. As an
example, in competitions among different machine learning algorithms,
the test set is kept by a judge to evaluate the submissions and is never
shared with the contestants.
2.3.4 Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) Criterion
We have seen that the decision regarding the model order M in ML
learning concerns the tension between bias, whose reduction calls for a
larger M, and estimation error, whose decrease requires a smaller M.
ML provides asingle integer parameter, M, as a gauge to tradeoff bias
and estimation error. As we will discuss here, the MAP approach and,
moregenerally, regularization, enablea finercontrol of these two terms.
The key idea is to leverage prior information available on the behavior
of the parameters in the absence, or presence, of overfitting.
To elaborate, consider the following experiment. Evaluate the ML
solution w in (2.18) for different values of M and observe how it
ML
changesaswemovetowardstheoverfittingregimebyincreasingM (see
also [23,Table 1.1]). For the experiment reported in Fig. 2.2, we obtain
the following values: for M = 1, w = [0.93, 1.76]T; for M = 3,
ML
−
w = [ 0.28, 13.32, 35.92, 22.56]T;andforM = 9,w = [13.86,
ML ML
− −
780.33, 12.99 103, 99.27 103, 416.49 103, 1.03 106, 1.56
− × − × × − × ×
106, 1.40 106, 0.69 106, 1.44 106]. These results suggest that a
× × − ×
32 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
manifestation of overfitting is the large value of norm w of thevector
k k
of weights. We can use this observation as prior information, that is as
part of the inductive bias, in designing a learning algorithm.
To this end, we can impose a prior distribution on the vector of
weights that gives lower probability to large values. A possible, butnot
the only, way to do this is to is to assume a Gaussian prior as
w (0,α−1I), (2.24)
∼ N
so that all weights are a priori i.i.d. zero-mean Gaussian variables with
variance α−1. Increasing α forces the weights to be smaller as it re-
duces the probability associated with large weights. The precision vari-
able α is an example of a hyperparameter. In a Bayesian framework,
hyperparameters control the distribution of the model parameters. As
anticipated, hyperparameters are determined via validation.
RatherthanmaximizingtheLL,thatis,probabilitydensity p(t x ,w,β)
D D
|
ofthelabelsinthetrainingset,asforML,theMAPcriterionprescribes
the maximization of the joint probability distribution of weights and
of labels given the prior p(w) = (w 0,α−1I), that is,
N |
N
p(t ,w x ,β) = p(w) p(t x ,w,β). (2.25)
D D n n
| |
n=1
Y
Note that a prior probability can also be assumed for the parameter β,
butin this example we leave β as a deterministic parameter. TheMAP
learning criterion can hence be formulated as
N
min lnp(t x ,w,β) lnp(w). (2.26)
n n
w,β − | −
n=1
X
The name “Maximum a Posteriori” is justified by the fact that
problem (2.26) is equivalent to maximizing the posterior distribution
of the parameters w given the available data, as we will further discuss
in the next section. This yields the following problem for the weight
vector
λ
minL (w)+ w 2, (2.27)
D
w Nk k
where we have defined λ = α/β and we recall that the training loss is
L (w) = N−1 t X w 2.
D D D
k − k
2.3. Frequentist Approach 33
ML vs. MAP. Observing (2.27), it is important to note the fol-
lowing general property of the MAP solution: As the numberN of data
points grows large, the MAP estimate tends to the ML estimate, given
that the contribution of the prior information term decreases as 1/N.
When N is large enough,any priorcredence is hence supersededby the
information obtained from the data.
Problem (2.27), which is often referred to as ridge regression, mod-
ifies the ML criterion by adding the quadratic (or Tikhonov) regular-
ization function
R(w) = w 2 (2.28)
k k
multiplied by the term λ/N. The regularization function forces the
norm of the solution to be small, particularly with larger values of the
hyperparameter λ, or equivalently α. The solution of problem (2.27)
can be found by using standard LS analysis, yielding
w = (λI +XTX )−1XTt . (2.29)
MAP D D D D
This expression confirms that, as N grows large, the term λI becomes
negligible and the solution tends to the ML estimate (2.18) (see [86]
for a formal treatment).
34 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
2
generalization
1.5
(via validation)
1
0.5
training
0
-40 -30 -20 -10 0
Figure 2.6: Square root of the generalization loss L (w ) and of the training
p MAP
lossL (w )asafunctionoftheregularizationparameterλforthetrainingdata
D MAP
set in Fig. 2.1 with M =9.
Fig.2.6 showsthesquaredrootofthegeneralization lossL (w )
p MAP
and of the training loss L (w ) as a function of λ (in logarithmic
D MAP
scale) for the training data set in Fig. 2.1 with M = 9. The general-
ization loss is estimated using validation. We observe that increasing
λ, and hence the relevance of the regularization term, has a similar im-
pact as decreasing the model order M. A larger λ reduces the effective
capacity of the model. Stated in different words, increasing λ reduces
overfitting but may entail a larger bias.
OtherstandardexamplesforthepriordistributionincludetheLaplace
pdf, which yields the l norm regularization function R(w) = w =
1 k k1
M w . This term promotes the sparsity of the solution, which is
j=0| |1
useful in many signal recovery algorithms [14] and in non-parametric
P
function estimation [146]. The corresponding optimization problem
λ
minL (w)+ w (2.30)
D 1
w Nk k
is known as LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Opera-
tor).
2.3. Frequentist Approach 35
2.3.5 Regularization
We have seen above that the MAP learning criterion amounts to the
addition of a regularization function R(w) to the ML or ERM learning
losses. This function penalizes values of the weight vector w that are
likely to occur in the presence of overfitting, or, generally, that are im-
probable on the basis of the available prior information. The net effect
of this addition is to effectively decrease the capacity of the model, as
thesetof valuesfortheparametervector w thatthelearningalgorithm
is likely to choose from is reduced. As a result, as seen, regularization
can control overfitting and its optimization requires validation.
Regularization generally refers to techniques that aim at reducing
overfitting during training. The discussion in the previous subsection
has focused on a specific form of regularization that is grounded in a
probabilistic interpretation in terms of MAP learning. We note that
the same techniques, such as ridge regression and LASSO, can also
be introduced independently of a probabilistic framework in an ERM
formulation. Furthermore, apart from the discussed addition of regu-
larization terms to the empirical risk, there are other ways to perform
regularization.
One approach is to modify the optimization scheme by using tech-
niques such as early stopping [56]. Another is to augment the training
set by generating artificial examples and hence effectively increasing
the number N of training examples. Related to this idea is the tech-
nique known as bagging. With bagging, we first create a number K of
bootstrap data sets. Bootstrap data sets are obtained by selecting N
data points uniformly with replacement from (so that the same data
D
pointgenerallyappearsmultipletimesinthebootstrapdataset).Then,
we train the model K times, each time over a different bootstrap set.
Finally, we average the results obtained from the models using equal
weights. If theerrors accrued by thedifferent modelswere independent,
baggingwouldyieldanestimation errorthatdecreases withK.Inprac-
tice, significantly smaller gains are obtained, particularly for large K,
given that the bootstrap data sets are all drawn from and hence the
D
estimation errors are not independent [23].
36 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
2.4 Bayesian Approach
The frequentist approaches discussed in the previous section assume
the existence of a true distribution, and aim at identifying a specific
valuefortheparameters θ of aprobabilisticmodeltoderiveapredictor
(cf. (2.3)). ML chooses the value θ that maximizes the probability of
the training data, while MAP includes in this calculation also prior
informationabouttheparametervector.Withthefrequentistapproach,
there are hence two distributions on the data: the true distribution,
approximated by the empirical distribution of the data and the model
(see further discussion in Sec. 2.8).
The Bayesian viewpoint is conceptually different: (i) It assumes
that all data points are jointly distributed according to a distribution
that is known except for some hyperparameters; and (ii) the model
parameters θ are jointly distributed with the data. As a result, as it
will be discussed, rather than committing to a single value to explain
thedata,theBayesian approachconsiderstheexplanationsprovidedby
allpossiblevalues ofθ,each weighted according toagenerally different,
and data-dependent, “belief”.
Moreformally,theBayesianviewpointseesthevectorofparameters
asrvsthatarejointlydistributedwiththelabelst inthetrainingdata
D
and with the new example t. We hence have the joint distribution
D
p(t ,w,t x ,x). We recall that the conditioning on the domain points
D D
|
x and x in the training set and in the new example, respectively, are
D
hallmarksofdiscriminativeprobabilisticmodels.TheBayesian solution
simply takes this modeling choice to its logical end point: in order to
predict the new label t, it directly evaluates the posterior distribution
p(t x ,t ,x) = p(t ,x) given the available information ( ,x) by ap-
D D
| |D D
plying the marginalization rules of probability to the joint distribution
p(t ,w,t x ,x).
D D
|
Asseen,theposteriorprobabilityp(t ,x)canbeusedasthepredic-
|D
tive distribution in (2.3) to evaluate a predictor tˆ(x). However, a fully
Bayesian solution returns the entire posterior p(t ,x), which provides
|D
significantly more information aboutthe unobservedlabel t. As we will
discuss below, this knowledge, encoded in the posterior p(t ,x), com-
|D
bines both the assumed prior information about the weight vector w
2.4. Bayesian Approach 37
and the information that is obtained from the data .
D
To elaborate, in the rest of this section, we assume that the preci-
sion parameter β is fixed and that the only learnable parameters are
theweights invector w.Thejoint distributionofthelabels inthetrain-
ing set, of the weight vector and of the new label, conditioned on the
domain points x in the training set and on the new point x, is given
D
as
p(t ,w,t x ,x) = p(w) p(t x ,w) p(t x,w) .
D D D D
| | |
aprioridistribution likelihood distributionofnewdata
(2.31)
|{z} | {z } | {z }
In the previous equation, we have identified the a priori distribution of
the data; the likelihood term p(t x ,w) = N (t µ(x ,w),β−1)
D | D n=1N n | n
in (2.13)4; and the pdf of the new label p(t w,x) = (t µ(x,w),β−1).
|Q N |
It is often useful to drop the dependence on the domain points x and
D
x to write only the joint distribution of the random variables in the
model as
p(t ,w,t) = p(w) p(t w) p(t w) . (2.32)
D D
| |
aprioridistribution likelihood distributionofnew data
This factorization can|b{ez}represe|nte{dz gr}aphicall|y{bzy}the Bayesian Net-
work (BN) in Fig. 2.7. The significance of the graph should be clear by
inspection, and it will be discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
Itis worth pointingoutthat, by treating all quantities inthemodel
–exceptforthehyperparameterα–asrvs,theBayesian viewpointdoes
away with thedistinction between learning and inference. In fact, since
the joint distribution is assumed to be known in a Bayesian model, the
problemathandbecomesthatofinferringtheunknownrvt.Torestate
this important point, the Bayesian approach subsumes all problems in
the general inference task of estimating a subset of rvs given other rvs
in a set of jointly distributed rvs with a known joint distribution.
4ThelikelihoodisalsoknownassamplingdistributionwithintheBayesianframe-
work [92].
38 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
Figure 2.7: Bayesian Network (BN) describing the joint distribution (2.32) of the
weight vector w, of the labels t in the training data D and t in the new example,
D
as used in theBayesian approach.
As mentioned, we are interested in computing the posterior proba-
bilityp(t ,x)ofthenewlabeltgiven thetrainingdata andthenew
|D D
domain point x = x. Dropping again the domain variables to simplify
the notation, we apply standard rules of probability to obtain
p(t ,t) p(w)p(t w)
D D
p(t t )= = | p(t w)dw
D
| p(t ) p(t ) |
D Z D
= p(w t )p(t w)dw, (2.33)
D
| |
Z
wherethesecondequalityfollowsfromthemarginalizationrulep(t ,t) =
D
p(t ,w,t)dw andthelastequality fromBayes’theorem.Puttingback
D
the dependence on the domain variables, we obtain the predictive dis-
R
tribution as
p(t x, ) = p(w ) p(t x,w)dw. (2.34)
| D |D |
Z
posteriordistributionofw
This is the key equation. |Ac{czord}ingly, the Bayesian approach con-
siders the predictive probability p(t x,w) associated with each value of
|
the weight vector w weighted by the posterior belief
p(w)p(t x ,w)
D D
p(w ) = | . (2.35)
|D p(t x )
D D
|
The posterior belief p(w ), which defines the weight of the parameter
|D
vector w, is hence proportional to the prior belief p(w) multiplied by
the correction p(t x ,w) due to the observed data.
D D
|
Computing the posterior p(w ), and a fortiori also the predictive
|D
distributionp(t x, ),isgenerallyadifficulttaskthatrequirestheadop-
| D
tion of approximate inferencetechniques covered in Chapter8. For this
2.4. Bayesian Approach 39
example, however, we can directly compute the predictive distribution
as [23]
t x, (µ(x,w ),s2(x)), (2.36)
MAP
| D ∼N
−1
wheres2(x)= β−1(1+φ(x)T λI +XTX φ(x)). Therefore,in this
D D
particular example, the optim(cid:16)al predictor u(cid:17)nderℓ
2
loss is MAP. This is
consequenceofthefactthatmodeandmeanofaGaussianpdfcoincide,
and is not a general property. Even so, as discussed next, the Bayesian
viewpointcanprovidesignificantlymoreinformationonthelabeltthan
the ML or MAP.
ML and MAP vs. Bayesian approach. The Bayesian posterior
(2.36) provides a finer prediction of the labels t given the explanatory
variables x as compared to the predictive distribution p(t x,θ ) =
ML
|
(µ(x,w ),β−1) returned by ML and similarly by MAP. To see this,
ML
N
note that the latter has the same variance for all values of x, namely
β−1. Instead, the Bayesian approach reveals that, due to the uneven
distribution of the observed values of x, the accuracy of the prediction
of labels depends on the value of x: Values of x closer to the existing
points in the training sets generally exhibit a smaller variance.
This is shown in Fig. 2.8, which plots a training set, along with the
corresponding predictor µ(x,w ) and the high-probability interval
MAP
µ(x,w ) s(x) produced by the Bayesian method. We set M = 9,
MAP
±
β−1 = 0.1 and α−1 = 0.2 105. For reference, we also show the interval
×
µ(x,w ) β−1/2 that would result from the MAP analysis. This
MAP
±
intervals illustrate the capability of the Bayesian approach to provide
information about the uncertainty associated with the estimate of t.
This advantage of the Bayesian approach reflects its conceptual dif-
ference with respect to the frequentist approach: The frequentist pre-
dictive distribution refers to a hypothetical new observation generated
with the same mechanism as the training data; instead, the Bayesian
predictive distribution quantifies the statistician’s belief in the value of
t given the assumed prior and the training data.
40 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
x
t
Bayesian:
µ(x,w MAP)±s(x)
µ(x,w MAP)
MAP:µ(x,w MAP)±β−1
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the predictive distribution p(t|x,D) produced by the
Bayesian method for the training set shown in the figure as compared to that ob-
tainedwiththeMAPcriterion.Thelargerintervalcorrespondstoµ(x,w )±s(x)
MAP
fortheBayesianmethod,whilethesmallerintervaltoµ(x,w )±β−1/2 forMAP
MAP
(M =9, β−1 =0.1 and α−1 =0.2×105).
From (2.36), we can make another important general observation
about the relationship with ML and MAP concerning the asymptotic
behavior when N is large. In particular, when N , we have al-
→ ∞
ready seen that, informally, the limit w w holds. We now
MAP ML
→
observe that it is also the case that the variance s2(x) of the Bayesian
predictive distribution tends to β−1. As a result, we can conclude that
the Bayesian predictive distribution approaches that returned by ML
when N is large. A way to think about this conclusion is that, when
N is large, the posterior distribution p(w ) of the weights tends to
|D
concentrate around the ML estimate, hence limiting the average (2.34)
to the contribution of the ML solution.
Marginallikelihood.AnotheradvantageoftheBayesianapproach
is that, in principle, it allows model selection to be performed without
validation. Toward this end, compute the marginal likelihood
N
p(t x )= p(w) p(t x ,w)dw, (2.37)
D D n n
| |
Z n=1
Y
that is, the probability density of the training set when marginalizing
over theweightdistribution.WiththeMLapproach,thecorresponding
2.4. Bayesian Approach 41
quantity p(t x ,w ) can only increase by choosing a larger model
D D ML
|
order M. In fact, a larger M entails more degrees of freedom in the
optimization (2.16)of theLL.Asimilar discussionapplies alsotoMAP.
However, this is not the case for (2.37): a larger M implies a more
“spread-out” prior distribution of the weights, which may result in a
more diffuse distribution of the labels in (2.37). Hence, increasing M
may yield a smaller marginal likelihood.
-7
10
1
0.8
=
0
0.6
= /8
0
0.4
= /2
0
0.2
= /4
0
0
0 2 4 6 8
Figure 2.9: Marginal likelihood versus the model order M for the training set of
Fig. 2.1 (β =10, α =10−3).
0
To illustrate this point, Fig. 2.9 plots the marginal likelihood for
the data set in Fig. 2.1 for β = 10 and three different values of α as a
function of M. The marginal likelihood in this example can be easily
computed since we have
t x = x (0,α−1X XT +β−1I). (2.38)
D | D D ∼ N D D
It is observed that the marginal likelihood presents a peak at a given
valueofM,whiledecreasingwhenmovingaway fromtheoptimalvalue.
Therefore, we could take the value of M at which the marginal likeli-
hood is maximized as the selected model order.
Does this mean that validation is really unnecessary whenadopting
a Bayesian viewpoint? Unfortunately, this is not necessarily the case.
42 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
In fact, one still needs to set the hyperparameter α. As seen in Fig.
2.9, varying α can lead to different conclusions on the optimal value
of M. An alternative approach would be to treat α, and even M, as
rvs with given priors to be specified (see, e.g., [131]). This would not
obviate the problem of selecting hyperparameters – now defining the
priordistributionsofαandM –butitcanleadtopowerfulhierarchical
models. The necessary tools will be discussed in Chapter 7.
As a final note, rather than using often impractical exhaustive
search methods, the optimization over the hyperparameters and the
model order M for all criteria discussed so far, namely ML, MAP and
Bayesian,canbecarriedoutusingso-calledBayesianoptimizationtools
[132]. A drawback of these techniques is that they have their own hy-
perparameters that need to be selected.
Empirical Bayes. Straddling both frequentist and Bayesian view-
points is the so-called empirical Bayes method. This approach assumes
an a priori distribution for the parameters, but then estimates the pa-
rameters of the prior – say mean and variance of a Gaussian prior –
from the data [48].
∗
2.5 Minimum Description Length (MDL)
Inthissection,webrieflyintroduceathird,conceptuallydistinct,learn-
ing philosophy – the MDL criterion. The reader is warned that the
treatment here is rather superficial, and that a more formal definition
of the MDL criterion would would require a more sophisticated dis-
cussion, which can be found in [60]. Furthermore, some background
in information theory is preferable in order to fully benefit from this
discussion.
To start, we first recall from the treatment above that learning
requires the identification of a model, or hypothesis class – here the
model order M – and of a specific hypothesis, defined by parameters θ
– here θ = (w,β) – within the class. While MDL can be used for both
tasks, we will focus here only on the first.
To build the necessary background, we now need to review the
relationshipbetweenprobabilisticmodelsandcompression.Tothisend,
consider a signal x taking values in a finite alphabet , e.g., a pixel
X
2.5. Minimum Description Length (MDL)∗ 43
in a gray scale image. Fix some probability mass function (pmf) p(x)
on this alphabet. A key result in information theory states that it is
possible to design a lossless compression scheme that uses logp(x)
⌈− ⌉
bits to represent value x5
By virtue of this result, the choice of a probability distribution p(x)
isakintotheselection ofalossless compressionschemethatproducesa
descriptionofaround logp(x)bitstorepresentvaluex.Notethatthe
−
descriptionlength logp(x)decreases withtheprobability assigned by
−
p(x) to value x: more likely values under p(x) are assigned a smaller
description. Importantly, a decoder would need to know p(x) in order
to recover x from the bit description.
At an informal level, the MDL criterion prescribes the selection
of a model that compresses the training data to the shortest possi-
ble description. In other words, the model selected by MDL defines a
compression scheme that describes the data set with the minimum
D
number of bits. As such, the MDL principle can be thought of as a for-
malization of Occam’s razor: choose the model that yields the simplest
explanation of the data. As we will see below, this criterion naturally
leads to a solution that penalizes overfitting.
What is the length of the description of a data set that results
D
from the selection of a specific value of M? The answer is not straight-
forward, since, for a given value of M, there are as many probability
distributions as there are values for the corresponding parameters θ
to choose from. A formal calculation of the description length would
hence require the introduction of the concept of universal compression
for a given probabilistic model [60]. Here, we will limit ourselves to a
particular class of universal codes known as two-part codes.
Using two-part codes, we can compute the description length for
the data that results from the choice of a model order M as fol-
D
lows. First, we obtain the ML solution (w ,β ). Then, we describe
ML ML
the data set by using a compression scheme defined by the probabil-
ity p(t x,w ,β ) = (t µ(x,w ),β−1 ). As discussed, this pro-
| ML ML N | ML ML
5This is known as Kraft’s inequality. More precisely, it states that the lossless
compressionschemeathandisprefix-freeandhencedecodable,orinvertible,without
delay [38].
44 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
duces a description of approximately N logp(t x ,w ,β )
− n=1 n | n ML ML
bits6. This description is, however, not sufficient, since the decoder of
P
thedescriptionshouldalsobeinformedabouttheparameters(w ,β ).
ML ML
Using quantization, the parameters can be described by means of a
numberC(M)of bits thatis proportionalto thenumberof parameters,
here M+2. Concatenating these bits with the description produced by
the ML model yields the overall description length
N
logp(t x ,w ,β )+C(M). (2.39)
n n ML ML
− |
n=1
X
MDL – in the simplified form discussed here – selects the model order
M that minimizes the description length (2.39). Accordingly, the term
C(M) acts as a regularizer. The optimal value of M for the MDL
criterion is hence the result of the trade-off between the minimization
of the overhead C(M), which calls for a small value of M, and the
minimization of the NLL, which decreases with M.
Under some technical assumptions, the overhead term can be often
evaluated in the form (K/2)lnN + c, where K is the number of pa-
rameters in the model and c is a constant. This expression is not quite
useful in practice, but it provides intuition about the mechanism used
by MDL to combat overfitting.
2.6 Information-Theoretic Metrics
We now provide a brief introduction to information theoretic metrics
by leveraging the example studied in this chapter. As we will see in the
following chapters, information-theoretic metrics are used extensively
inthedefinitionoflearningalgorithms.AppendixAprovidesadetailed
introduction to information-theoretic measures in terms of inferential
tasks. Here we introduce the key metrics of Kullback-Leibler (KL) di-
vergence and entropy by examining the asymptotic behavior of ML in
the regime of large N. The case with finite N is covered in Chapter 6
(see Sec. 6.4.3).
6This neglects the technical issue that the labels are actually continuous rvs,
which could beaccounted for by using quantization.
2.6. Information-Theoretic Metrics 45
To start, we revisit the ML problem (2.15), which amounts to the
minimization of the NLL N−1 N lnp(t x ,w,β), also known as
− n=1 n | n
log-loss. According to the frequentist viewpoint, the training set vari-
P
ables are drawn i.i.d. according to the true distribution p(x,t), i.e.,
(x ,t ) p i.i.d. over n = 1,...,N. By the strong law of large num-
n n xt
∼
bers, we then have the following limit with probability one
N
1
lnp(t x ,w,β) E [ lnp(tx,w,β)]. (2.40)
−N
n
|
n
→
(x,t)∼pxt
− |
n=1
X
As we will see next, this limit has a useful interpretation in terms of
the KL divergence.
The KL divergence between two distributions p and q is defined as
p(x)
KL(p q) = E ln . (2.41)
k
x∼px
q(x)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
TheKLdivergenceishencetheexpectationoftheLog-LikelihoodRatio
(LLR) ln(p(x)/q(x)) between the two distributions, where the expecta-
tion is taken with respect to the distribution at the numerator. The
LLR tends to be larger, on average, if the two distributions differ more
significantly, while being uniformly zero only when the two distribu-
tions are equal. Therefore, the KL divergence measures the “distance”
between two distributions. As an example, with p(x) = (xµ ,σ2)
N | 1 1
and q(x)= (xµ ,σ2), we have
N | 2 2
1 σ2 (µ µ )2 σ2
KL(p q) = 1 + 2 − 1 1+ln 2 , (2.42)
k 2 σ 2 2 σ 2 2 − σ 1 2 !
and, in the special case σ2 = σ2 = σ2, we can write
1 2
1(µ µ )2
2 1
KL(p q) = − , (2.43)
k 2 σ2
which indeed increase as the two distributions become more different.
The KL divergence is measured in nats when the natural logarithm
is used as in (2.41), while it is measured in bits if a logarithm in base 2
is used. In general, the KL divergence has several desirable properties
as a measure of the distance of two distributions [23, pp. 55-58]. The
most notable is Gibbs’ inequality
KL(p q) 0, (2.44)
k ≥
46 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
where equality holds if and only if the two distributions p and q are
identical. Nevertheless, the KL divergence has also some seemingly un-
favorable features, such as its non-symmetry, that is, the inequality
KL(p q) = KL(q p). We will see in Chapter 8 that the absence of
k 6 k
symmetry can be leveraged to define different types of approximate
inference and learning techniques.
Importantly, the KL divergence can be written as
KL(p q) = E [ lnq(x)] E [ lnp(x)], (2.45)
||
x∼px
− −
x∼px
−
H(p||q) H(p)
| {z } | {z }
where the first term, H(p q), is known as cross-entropy between p(x)
||
andq(x)andplaysanimportantroleasalearningcriterionasdiscussed
below; while the second term, H(p), is the entropy of distribution p(x),
which is a measure of randomness. We refer to Appendix A for further
discussion on the entropy.
Basedonthedecomposition(2.45),weobservethatthecross-entropy
H(p q) can also be taken as a measure of divergence between two dis-
||
tributions when one is interested in optimizing over the distribution
q(x), since the latter does not appear in the entropy term. Note that
the cross-entropy, unlike the KL divergence, can be negative.
Using the definition (2.41), the expected log-loss on the right-hand
side of (2.40) can be expressed as
E [ lnp(tx,w,β)] = E [H(p(t x) p(t x,w,β))], (2.46)
(x,t)∼pxt
− |
x∼px
| || |
which can be easily verified by using the law of iterated expectations.
Therefore, the average log-loss is the average over the domain point x
of the cross-entropy between the real predictive distribution p(t x) and
|
the predictive distribution p(t x,w,β) dictated by the model. From
|
(2.46), the ML problem (2.15) can be interpreted as an attempt to
make the model-based discriminative distribution p(t x,w,β) as close
|
as possible to the actual posterior p(t x). This is done by minimizing
|
the KL divergence, or equivalently the cross-entropy, upon averaging
over p(x).
As final remarks, in machine learning, it is common to use the
notation KL(p q) even when q is unnormalized, that is, when q(x) is
k
2.7. Interpretation and Causality∗ 47
non-negative, but we may have the inequality q(x)dx = 1. We also
6
observe that the entropy H(p) = E [ lnp(x)] is non-negative for
x∼px − R
discrete rvs, while it may be negative for continuous rvs. Due to its
different properties when evaluated for continuous rvs, the quantity
H(p) should be more properly referred to as differential entropy when
the distribution p is a pdf [38]. In the rest of this monograph, we will
not always make this distinction.
∗
2.7 Interpretation and Causality
Having learned a predictive model using any of the approaches dis-
cussed above, an important, and often overlooked, issue is the interpre-
tation of theresults returnedby the learned algorithm. This has in fact
grown into a separate field within the active research area of deep neu-
ral networks (see Chapter 4) [102]. Here, we describea typical pitfall of
interpretation that relates to the assessment of causality relationships
between the variables in the model. We follow an example in [113].
Fig. 2.10 (top) shows a possible distribution of data points on the
plane defined by coordinates x = exercise and t = cholesterol (the
numerical values are arbitrary). Learning a model that relates t as the
dependent variable to the variable x would clearly identify an upward
trend – an individual that exercises more can be predicted to have a
higher cholesterol level. This prediction is legitimate and supported by
the available data, but can we also conclude that exercising less would
reduce one’s cholesterol? In other words, can we conclude that there
exists a causal relationships between x and t? We know the answer to
be no, but this cannot be ascertained from the data in the figure.
48 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
40
20
0
-20
-5 0 5 10 15 20 25
Exercise
loretselohC
40
20
0
-20
-5 0 5 10 15 20 25
Exercise
loretselohC
30 40
10 20
50
Figure 2.10: Illustration of Simpson’s paradox [113].
The way out of this conundrum is to leverage prior information
we have about the problem domain. In fact, we can explain away this
spurious correlation by including another measurable variable in the
model, namely age. To see this, consider the same data, now redrawn
by highlighting the age of the individual corresponding to each data
point. The resulting plot, seen in Fig. 2.10 (bottom), reveals that older
people — within the observed bracket — tend to have a higher choles-
terol as well as to exercise more. Therefore, age is a common cause of
both exercise and cholesterol levels. In order to capture the causality
relationship between the latter variables, we hence need to adjust for
age. Doing this requires to consider the trend within each age sepa-
rately, recovering the expected conclusion that exercising is useful to
lower one’s cholesterol.7
We conclude that in this example the correlation between x and t,
while useful for prediction, should not be acted upon for decision mak-
ing. When assessing the causal relationship between xand t, we should
first understand which other variables may explain the observations
and then discount any spurious correlations.
Thisdiscussionreveals animportantlimitation ofmostexistingma-
chine learning algorithms when it comes to identifying causality rela-
tionships, or, more generally, to answering counterfactual queries [112].
Thestudy of causality can becarried out within the elegant framework
7ThisexampleisaninstanceofthesocalledSimpson’sparadox:patternsvisible
in the data disappear, or are even reversed,on thesegregated data.
2.8. Summary 49
of interventions on probabilistic graphical models developed by Pearl
[113, 81, 118]. Other related approaches are covered in [115]. More dis-
cussion on probabilistic graphical models can be found in Chapter 7.
2.8 Summary
Inthischapter,wehavereviewedthreekeylearningframeworks,namely
frequentist, Bayesian and MDL, within a parametric probabilistic set-
up. The frequentist viewpoint postulates the presence of a true un-
known distribution for the data, and aims at learning a predictor that
generalizes well on unseen data drawn from this distribution. This can
be done either by learning a probabilistic model to be plugged into
the expression of the optimal predictor or by directly solving the ERM
problem over the predictor. The Bayesian approach outputs a predic-
tive distributionthatcombines priorinformation withthedata by solv-
ing the inference problem of computing the posterior distribution over
the unseen label. Finally, the MDL method aims at selecting a model
that allows the data to be described with the smallest number of bits,
hence doing away with the need to define the task of generalizing over
unobserved examples.
The chapter has also focused extensively on the key problem of
overfitting,demonstratinghowtheperformanceofalearningalgorithm
can be understood in terms of bias and estimation error. In particular,
whilechoosingahypothesisclass isessential inordertoenablelearning,
choosing the “wrong” class constitutes an irrecoverable bias that can
makelearningimpossible.Asareal-worldexample,asreportedin[109],
including as independent variables in x the ZIP code of an individual
seekingcreditatabankmaydiscriminateagainstimmigrantsorminori-
ties. Another example of this phenomenonis the famousexperiment by
B. F. Skinner on pigeons [133].
We conclude this chapter by emphasizing an important fact about
the probabilistic models that are used in modern machine learning
applications. In frequentist methods, typically at least two (possibly
conditional) distributions are involved: the empirical data distribution
and the model distribution. The former amounts to the histogram of
the data which, by the law of large numbers, tends to the real distribu-
50 A Gentle Introduction through Linear Regression
tion when the number of data points goes to infinity; while the latter
is parametrized and is subject to optimization. For this reason, diver-
gence metrics between the two distributions play an important role in
the development of learning algorithms. We will see in the rest of the
monograph that other frequentist methods may involve a single distri-
bution rather than two, as discussed in Sec. 6.6, or an additional, so
called variational, distribution, as covered in Sec. 6.3 and Chapter 8.
In contrast, Bayesian methods posit a single coherent distribution
over the data and the parameters, and frame the learning problem as
oneofinferenceofunobservedvariables.AswewilldiscussinChapter8,
variational Bayesian methods also introduce an additional variational
distribution and are a building block for frequentist learning in the
presence of unobserved variables.
The running example in this chapter has been one of linear regres-
sion for a Gaussian model. The next chapter provides the necessary
tools to construct and learn more general probabilistic models.
3
Probabilistic Models for Learning
In the previous chapter, we have introduced the frequentist, Bayesian,
andMDL learningframeworks.Aswehave seen,parametricprobabilis-
tic models play a key role for all three of them. The linear regression
example considered in the previous chapter was limited to a simple lin-
ear Gaussian model, which is insufficient to capture the range of learn-
ing problems that are encountered in practice. For instance, scenarios
of interest may encompass discretevariables ornon-negative quantities.
Inthischapter,weintroduceafamilyofprobabilisticmodels,knownas
theexponential family,whosemembersareusedascomponentsinmany
of themost common probabilistic models and learning algorithms. The
treatment here will be leveraged in the rest of the monograph in order
to provide the necessary mathematical background. Throughout this
chapter, we will specifically emphasize the common properties of the
models in the exponential family, which will prove useful for deriving
learning algorithms in the following chapters.
51
52 Probabilistic Models for Learning
3.1 Preliminaries
We start with a brief review of some definitions that will be used
throughout the chapter and elsewhere in the monograph (see [28] for
more details). Readers with a background in convex analysis and cal-
culus may justreview the concept of sufficient statistic in the last para-
graph.
First, we define a convex set as a subset of RD, for some D, that
contains all segments between any two points in the set. Geometrically,
convex sets hence cannot have “indentations”. Function f(x) is convex
if its domain is aconvex set and if itsatisfies the inequality f(λx+(1
−
λ)y) λf(x)+(1 λ)f(y) for all x and y in its domain and for all
≤ −
0 λ 1. Geometrically, this condition says that the function is “ ”-
≤ ≤ ∪
shaped: the curve defining the function cannot lie above the segment
obtained by connecting any two points on the curve. A function is
strictly convex if the inequality above is strict except for λ = 0 or
λ = 1 when x = y. A concave, or strictly concave, function is defined
6
by reversing the inequality above – it is hence “ ”-shaped.
∩
The minimization of a convex (“ ”) function over a convex con-
∪
straint set or the maximization of a concave (“ ”) function over a
∩
convex constraint set are known as convex optimization problems. For
these problems, there exist powerful analytical and algorithmic tools
to obtain globally optimal solutions [28].
We also introduce two useful concepts from calculus. The gradient
of a differentiable function f(x) with x = [x x ]T RD is defined
1 D
··· ∈
as the D 1 vector f(x) = [∂f(x)/∂x ∂f(x)/∂x ]T containing
1 D
× ∇ ···
all partial derivatives. At any point x in the domain of the function,
the gradient is a vector that points to the direction of locally maximal
increase of the function. TheHessian 2f(x) is the D D matrix with
∇ ×
(i,j) element given by the second-order derivative ∂2f(x)/∂x ∂x . It
i j
captures the local curvature of the function.
Finally, we define the concept of sufficient statistic. Consider a rv
x p(xθ), whose distribution depends on some parameter θ. A func-
∼ |
tion f(x) is a sufficient statistic1 for the estimate of θ if the likelihood
1A statistic is a function of thedata.
3.2. The Exponential Family 53
p(xθ)oftheparametersθ dependsonxonlythroughthefunctionf(x).
|
As an example, for a rv x (0,σ2), the function f(x) = x2 can be
∼ N
easily seen to be sufficient for the estimate of the variance σ2.
3.2 The Exponential Family
Inthis section, weintroducetheexponential family of parametric prob-
abilistic models. As it will be discussed, this family includes as special
casesmostofthedistributionstypically assumedwhensolvingmachine
learningproblems.Forexample,itincludesGaussian,Laplace,Gamma,
Beta and Dirichlet pdfs, as well as Bernoulli, Categorical, multinomial,
and Poisson pmfs. An extensive list can be found in [156].
3.2.1 Basic Definitions
The exponential family contains probabilistic models of the form
K
1
p(xη) = exp η u (x) m(x)
k k
| Z(η) !
k=1
X
1
= exp ηTu(x) m(x), (3.1)
Z(η)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
wherexisadiscreteorcontinuous-valued vector; η = [η η ]T isthe
1 K
···
vector of natural parameters; u(x) = [u (x) u (x)]T is the vector of
1 K
···
sufficient statistics, with each sufficient statistic u (x) being a function
k
of x; m(x) 0 is the base measure, which is a function of x that is
≥
independentofthenaturalparametervectorη;andZ(η)isthepartition
function
Z(η)= exp ηTu(x) m(x)dx (3.2)
Z (cid:16) (cid:17)
for continuous rvs and Z(η) = exp ηTu(x) m(x) for discrete rvs.
x
Thesufficientstatisticvectoru(x)canb(cid:16)eseento(cid:17)beasufficientstatistic
P
for the estimation of the natural parameter vector η given x.
The partition function normalizes the distribution so that it inte-
grates, or sums, to one. It is also often useful to use the unnormalized
distribution
p˜(xη) = exp ηTu(x) m(x), (3.3)
|
(cid:16) (cid:17)
54 Probabilistic Models for Learning
since the latter is generally easier to evaluate.
In short, distributions belonging to the exponential family are such
that the logarithm of the unnormalized distribution p˜(xη), which is
|
also known as the energy function, is linear2 in the natural parameters,
i.e.,
lnp˜(xη) = ηTu(x)+lnm(x). (3.4)
|
For this reason, models of the form (3.1) are also referred to as log-
linear.3 Including the partition function, the LL of the natural param-
eters can be written as
lnp(xη) = ηTu(x) A(η)+lnm(x), (3.5)
| −
where
A(η) = lnZ(η) (3.6)
is the log-partition function.
As per (3.1), a probabilistic model belonging to the exponential
family is identified by the set of sufficient statistics u (x) K , whose
{ k }k=1
order is irrelevant, and by the measure m(x). A specific hypothesis
within the model is selected by determining the natural parameter vec-
tor η. The set of feasible values for the natural parameters contains all,
and only, the vectors η for which the unnormalized distribution p˜(xη)
|
can be normalized, that is, for which the inequality A(η) < holds.
∞
We will see below that this set is convex.
Example 3.1. (Gaussian pdf) As afirstexample, consider the Gaus-
sian pdf
1 x2 ν ν2
(xν,σ2) = exp + x .
N | (2πσ2)1/2 −2σ2 σ2 − 2σ2 !
This can be written in the form (3.1) upon identification of the base
measure m(x) = 1 and of the sufficient statistics u(x) = [x x2]. Note
that, in order to do this, we need to map the parameters (ν,σ2) to the
2Or, more precisely, affinegiven thepresence of an additive constant.
3There exists a more general version of the exponential family in which the
naturalparameters are non-linearfunctions of theparameters that identify thedis-
tribution.
3.2. The Exponential Family 55
natural parameters via the relationship η = [ν/σ2 1/(2σ2) ]. As a
−
result, while the parameters (ν,σ2) take all possible allowed values
in R R+, the natural parameter vector η takes values in the set
×
R R−. Every value η in this set corresponds to a valid pdf within
×
the hypothesis class of (xν,σ2) models. Finally, we can compute the
N |
log-partition function as
ν2 1 η2 1 2η
A(η) = + ln(2πσ2) = 1 ln 2 . (3.7)
2σ2 2 −4η − 2 − 2π
2 (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
Inordertoensureidentifiability ofthenaturalparameters,thesuffi-
cient statistics u (x) K needtobelinearly independent.Thismeans
{ k }k=1
that no sufficient statistic u (x) should be computable, for all x, as
k
a linear combination of other sufficient statistics u (x) with k′ = k.
k′
6
For example, this is the case for the vector u(x) = [x x2] of sufficient
statistics for the Gaussian distribution. This condition is referred to as
minimal representation [151]. Unless stated otherwise, we will assume
in the following that the exponential family under study is minimal.
Furthermore, we will assume the technical condition that the set of fea-
sible values for η is also open (that is, it excludes its boundary), which
yields a regular exponential family.
3.2.2 Natural Parameters, Mean Parameters and Convexity
As suggested by the example above, once the sufficient statistics and
the base measure are fixed, a specific hypothesis – pdf or pmf – can be
identified by either specifyingthe vector η of natural parameters or the
vector µ of mean parameters. The latter is defined as the expectation
of the vector of sufficient statistics
µ = E [u(x)]. (3.8)
x∼p(x|η)
For the preceding example, we have the mean parameter vector µ =
[E[x] = ν, E[x2] = σ2+ν2]T. We can therefore use the notation p(xµ)
|
as well as p(xη) to describe a model in the exponential family. As we
|
will see below, the availability of these two parametrizations implies
that learning can be done on either sets of variables.
56 Probabilistic Models for Learning
A key property of the exponential family is that the mapping be-
tween natural parameters and mean parameters is given by the gradi-
ent of the log-partition function. Specifically, it can beverified that the
partial derivative of the log-partition function equals the mean of the
corresponding sufficient statistic
∂A(η)
= E [u (x)] = µ , (3.9)
x∼p(x|η) k k
∂η
k
or, in vector form,
A(η) = E [u(x)]= µ. (3.10)
η x∼p(x|η)
∇
Although we will not be making use of this result here, the Hessian
2A(η) of the log-partition function can be similarly seen to equal the
∇η
covariance matrix of the sufficient statistics4. It is also equal to the
Fisher information matrix for the natural parameters [45].
The log-partition function A(η) in (3.6) is strictly convex in η, as
it follows from the fact that it is a log-sum-exp function composed
with an affine function [28]. This property has the following important
consequences.First,thesetoffeasiblevaluesforthenaturalparameters
is a convex set [28]. Note that this is generally not the case for the
corresponding set of feasible values for the mean parameters. Second,
themapping(3.10)betweennaturalparametersηandmeanparameters
µ is invertible (see, e.g., [10])5.
Third, the LL function lnp(xη) in (3.5) is a concave function of η.
|
As further discussed below, the ML problem hence amounts to maxi-
mization of a convex optimization problem.
3.2.3 Bernoulli Model
Due to its importance for binary classification problems, we detail here
the Bernoulli model. We also introduce the important logistic sigmoid
function.
4More generally, thelog-partition functionA(η)isthecumulantfunction for rv
x.
5Theinversemappingbetweenmeanparametersandnaturalparametersisgiven
bythegradient∇ A∗(µ)oftheconvexconjugatefunctionA∗(µ)=sup ηTµ−A(η),
µ η
where themaximization is overthefeasible set of natural parameters.
3.2. The Exponential Family 57
The Bernoulli distribution for a binary rv x 0,1 is given as
∈{ }
Bern(xµ) = µx(1 µ)1−x, (3.11)
| −
with µ = E [x] = Pr[x = 1]. Since we can write the LL
x∼Bern(x|µ)
function as
µ
ln(Bern(xµ)) = ln x+ln(1 µ), (3.12)
| 1 µ −
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
the sufficient statistic defining the Bernoulli model is u(x) = x and
the measure function is m(x) = 1. The mapping between the natural
parameter η and the mean parameter µ is given as
µ
η = ln , (3.13)
1 µ
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
that is, the naturalparameter is the LLRη =ln(Bern(1µ)/Bern(0µ)).
| |
Function (3.13) is also known as the logit function. The corresponding
set of feasible values is hence R.
The inverse mapping is instead given by the logistic sigmoid func-
tion
1
µ = σ(η) = . (3.14)
1+e−η
The sigmoid function converts a real number into the interval [0,1]
via an S-shape that associates values less than 0.5 to negative values
of the argument and larger values to positive numbers. Finally, the
log-partition function is given by the convex function of the natural
parameters
A(η) = ln(1 µ)= ln(1+eη). (3.15)
− −
Note that the relationship (3.10) is easily verified.
3.2.4 Categorical or Multinoulli Model
For its role in multi-class classification, we introduce here in some de-
tail the Categorical or Multinoulli distribution, along with the one-hot
encoding of categorical variables and the soft-max function.
TheCategorical modelapplies todiscretevariables takingC values,
here labeled without loss of generality as 0,1,...,C 1 . Note that
{ − }
58 Probabilistic Models for Learning
setting C = 2 recovers the Bernoulli distribution. Pmfs in this model
are given as
C−1 C−1
1(x=k) 1− 1(x=k)
Cat(xµ) = µ µ k=1 , (3.16)
| k × 0
k=1 P
Y
where we have defined µ = Pr[x = k] for k = 1,...,C 1 and µ =
k 0
−
1 C−1µ = Pr[x = 0]. The LL function is given as
− k=1 k
P C−1
µ
k
ln(Cat(xµ)) = 1(x= k)ln +lnµ . (3.17)
0
| µ
0
k=1
X
Thisdemonstrates that thecategorical modelisin theexponentialfam-
ily, with sufficient statistics vector u(x) = [1(x = 1) 1(x = C 1)]T
··· −
and measure function m(x) = 1. Furthermore, the mean parameters
µ = [µ µ ]T are related to the natural parameter vector η =
1 C−1
···
[η η ]T by the mapping
1 C−1
···
µ
k
η = ln , (3.18)
k 1
−
C
j=
−
1
1µ j!
which again takes the form of an LLPR. The inverse mapping is given
by
eη1
1+ C−1 eηk
k=1
 . 
µ = P . . . (3.19)
 eηC−1 
 
1+ C−1 eηk
 k=1 
 
TheparametrizationgivenherePisminimal,sincethesufficientstatis-
ticsu(x)arelinearlyindependent.Anovercompleterepresentationwould
instead include in the vector of sufficient statistics also the function
1(x = 0). In this case, the resulting vector of sufficient statistics
1(x = 0)
.
u(x)=  . .  (3.20)
1(x = C 1)
 − 
 
is known as one-hot encoding of the categorical variable, since only
one entry equals 1 while the others are zero. Furthermore, with this
3.3. Frequentist Learning 59
encoding, the mapping between the natural parameters and the mean
parametersµ = [µ µ ]T canbeexpressedintermsofthesoftmax
0 C−1
···
function
eη0
C−1eηk
k=0
µ = softmax(η)=  P . . .  . (3.21)
 eηC−1 
 
 C−1eηk
 k=0 
 
The softmax function softmax(η) convePrts a vector of “scores” η into
a probability vector. Furthermore, the function has the property that,
as c grows to infinity, softmax(cη) tends to a vector with all zero en-
tries except for the position corresponding to the maximum value η
k
(assuming that it is unique). This justifies its name.
3.3 Frequentist Learning
In this section, we provide general results concerning ML and MAP
learningwhentheprobabilisticmodelbelongstotheexponentialfamily.
Asseeninthepreviouschapter,withMLandMAP,onepostulatesthat
the N available data points x = x ,...,x are i.i.d. realizations
D 1 N
{ }
from the probabilistic model p(xη) as
|
x p(xη), n = 1,...,N. (3.22)
n
i.∼i.d. |
This data is used to estimate the natural parameters η, or the corre-
sponding mean parameters µ.
Using (3.5), the LL of the natural parameter vector given the ob-
servation x can be written as
D
N
lnp(x η) = lnp(x η)
D n
| |
n=1
X
N N
= NA(η)+ηT u(x )+ lnm(x ). (3.23)
n n
−
n=1 n=1
X X
Therefore, neglecting terms independent of η, we can write
lnp(x η) = NA(η)+ηTu(x ), (3.24)
D D
| −
60 Probabilistic Models for Learning
where we have defined the cumulative sufficient statistics
N
u (x ) = u (x ), k =1,...,K, (3.25)
k D k n
n=1
X
and the vector u(x ) = [u (x ) u (x )]T.
D 1 D K D
···
A first important observation is that the LL function only depends
on the K statistics u (x ), k = 1,...,K. Therefore, the vector u(x )
k D D
is a sufficient statistic for the estimate of η given the observation x .
D
Importantly, vector u(x ) is of size K,andhenceit does notgrow with
D
the size N of the data set. In fact, the exponential family turns out to
be unique in this respect: Informally, among all distributions whose
support does not depend on the parameters, only distributions in the
exponential family have sufficient statistics whose number does not
grow with the number N of observations (Koopman-Pitman-Darmois
theorem) [7].
Gradient of the LL function. A key result that proves very
useful in deriving learning algorithms is the expression of the gradient
of the LL (3.24) with respect to the natural parameters. To start, the
partial derivative with respect to η can be written as
k
∂lnp(x η) ∂A(η)
D
| = u (x ) N . (3.26)
k D
∂η − ∂η
k k
Using (3.9) and (3.10), this implies that we have
1 ∂lnp(x η) 1
D
| = u (x ) µ , (3.27)
k D k
N ∂η N −
k
and for the gradient
1 1
lnp(x η) = u(x ) µ
η D D
N∇ | N −
N
1
= u(x ) µ. (3.28)
n
N −
n=1
X
The gradient (3.28) is hence given by the difference between the empir-
ical average N−1 N u(x ) of the sufficient statistics given the data
n=1 n
x and the ensemble average µ.
D P
3.3. Frequentist Learning 61
Thefollowingobservationisinstrumentalininterpretingalgorithms
based on gradient ascent or descent for exponential families. The nor-
malized gradient of the LL (3.28) has two components: (i) the “posi-
tive” component u(x )/N points in a direction of the natural param-
D
eter space that maximizes the unnormalized distribution lnp˜(x η) =
D
|
ηTu(x )+ N lnm(x ), hencemaximizing the“fitness”of themodel
D n=1 n
to the observed data x ; while (ii) the “negative” component µ =
P D −
A(η) points in a direction that minimizes the partition function,
η
−∇
thusminimizingthe“fitness”ofthemodeltotheunobserveddata. The
tension between these two components is resolved when the empirical
expectation of the sufficient statistics equals that under the model, as
discussed below.
ML Learning.Duetoconcavity oftheLLfunction,orequivalently
convexity of the NLL, and assuming the regularity of the distribution,
theML estimate η is obtained by imposingtheoptimality condition
ML
lnp(x η) = 0, (3.29)
η D
∇ |
which gives
N
1
µ = u(x ). (3.30)
ML n
N
n=1
X
In words, the ML estimate of the mean parameters is obtained by
matching the ensemble averages obtained under the model to the em-
pirical averages observed from the data. This procedure is known as
moment matching. Note that, from (3.30), if needed, we can also com-
pute the ML estimate η using the mapping between the two sets of
ML
parameters.
From (3.30), we can infer that the ML estimate is consistent: if
the data is generated from a distribution p(xη∗) within the assumed
|
family, theML estimate will tendto it with probability oneas N grows
to infinity by the strong law of large numbers [86]. However, for finite
N, ML may suffer from overfitting, as we will see next.
Example 3.2. (Gaussian pdf). The ML estimates of the parameters
62 Probabilistic Models for Learning
(µ, σ2) for the Gaussian model are given as
N
1
µ = x (3.31)
ML n
N
n=1
X
N
1
σ2 = x2 µ2 . (3.32)
ML N n− ML
n=1
X
For the Bernoulli model, we have the ML estimate of the mean param-
eter µ = Pr[x = 1]
N
1 N[1]
µ = x = , (3.33)
ML n
N N
n=1
X
where N [k] measures the number of observations equal to k, i.e.,
N[k] = n : x = k .
n
|{ }|
Note that N[1] has a binomial distribution. For the Categorical model,
we can similarly write the ML estimate of the mean parameters µ =
k
Pr[x = k] as
N
1 N[k]
µ = 1(x = k)= . (3.34)
k,ML n
N N
n=1
X
The vector [N[0],...,N[C 1]]T has a multinomial distribution.
−
To illustrate the problem of overfitting, consider the categorical
model. As per (3.34), if no instance of the data equal to some value
k is observed, i.e., if N[k] = 0, ML assigns a zero probability to the
event x = k. In mathematical terms, if N[k] = 0, the ML estimate of
the probability of the event x = k is zero, that is, µ = 0. So, ML
k,ML
giveszeroprobabilitytoanypreviouslyunobservedevent.Theproblem,
which is an instance of overfitting, is known as the black swan paradox
or zero-count problem: For the European explorers of the 17th century
– or at least for those of them adhering to the ML principle – the black
swans in the Americas could not exist! [104]
MAP Learning. A MAP solution can be in principle derived by
including in the optimality condition (3.29) the gradient of the prior
distribution.WewillinsteadsolvetheMAPprobleminthenextsection
by computing the mode of the posterior distribution of the parameters.
3.4. Bayesian Learning 63
3.4 Bayesian Learning
As we discussed in the previous chapter, the Bayesian viewpoint is to
treatallvariablesasjointlydistributed,includingthemodelparameters
µ and the new, unobserved value x. The joint distribution is given as
p(x ,µ,xα) = p(µ α) p(x µ) p(xµ) , (3.35)
D D
| | | |
aprioridistribution likelihood distributionofnewdata
where α represents th|e {vzec}tor of|hy{pzerp}aramete|rs{zde}fining the prior
distribution. The problem of inferring the unobserved value x is solved
by evaluating the predictive distribution
p(xx ,α) = p(µ x ,α)p(xµ)dµ. (3.36)
D D
| | |
Z
Thisdistributionaccountsfortheweightedaverage ofthecontributions
fromall values of theparameter vector µaccording to theposterior dis-
tribution p(µ x ,α). Note that, for clarity, we left indicated the depen-
D
|
dence on the hyperparameters α. Using Bayes’ theorem, the posterior
of the parameter vector can be written as
p(µ α)p(x µ)
D
p(µ x ,α) = | | p(µ α)p(x µ). (3.37)
D D
| p(x α) ∝ | |
D
|
As discussed in Chapter 2, this relationship highlights the dependence
oftheposterioronboththepriordistributionandthelikelihoodp(x µ).
D
|
We also note the the denominator in (3.37) is the marginal likelihood.
Prior distribution. Thefirstissuewe shouldaddressis thechoice
of the prior distribution. There are two main approaches: 1) Conjugate
prior:choosethepriorp(µ α),sothatposteriorp(µ x ,α)hasthesame
D
| |
distributionas thepriorp(µ α)butwithgenerally differentparameters;
|
2) Non-informative prior: choose the prior that is the least informative
given the observed data [23, pp. 117-120]. Here, we will work with
conjugate priors,which aremorecommonly adopted inapplications. In
fact, a key advantage of models in the exponential family is that they
all admit conjugate priors, and the conjugate priors are also members
of the exponential family.
Ratherthanprovidingageneraldiscussion,whichmaybeoflimited
practical use, we proceed by means of representative examples. A table
of models with corresponding prior distributions can be found in [155].
64 Probabilistic Models for Learning
3.4.1 Beta-Bernoulli Model
TheBeta-Bernoullimodelissuitabletostudybinarydata.Conditioned
on the parameter µ = Pr[x = 1], the pmf of the N i.i.d. available
observations x with x 0,1 is given as
D n
∈ { }
N
p(x µ) = Bern(x µ) = µN[1](1 µ)N[0]. (3.38)
D n
| | −
n=1
Y
As seen, a conjugate prior should be such that the posterior (3.37) has
the same distribution of the prior but with different parameters. For
thelikelihood(3.38),theconjugateprioristheBeta distribution,which
is defined as
p(µ a,b) = Beta(µ a,b) µa−1(1 µ)b−1, (3.39)
| | ∝ −
where a and b are hyperparameters and the normalization constant is
not made explicit in order to simplify the notation. It is worth empha-
sizing that (3.39) is a probability distribution on a probability µ. Plots
of the beta pdf for different values of a,b 1 can be found in Fig. 3.1.
≥
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Figure3.1:Betadistributionwithdifferentvaluesofthehyperparametersa,b≥1.
3.4. Bayesian Learning 65
Average and mode of the Beta pdf can be evaluated as
a
E [µ] = (3.40)
µ∼Beta(µ|a,b)
a+b
a 1
mode [µ] = − , (3.41)
µ∼Beta(µ|a,b)
a+b 2
−
wherethemodeexpression is onlyvalid whena,b > 1(whenthis condi-
tionisnotmet,thedistributionismulti-modal,seeFig.3.1).Themean
(3.39) suggests that the hyperparameters a and b can be interpreted as
the number of observations that are expected to equal “1” and “0”, re-
spectively, out of a total number of a+b measurements, based on prior
information alone. More fittingly, as we shall see next, we can think of
these a priori observations as “virtual” measurements, also known as
pseudo-counts, that should be used alongside the actual measurements
x during learning.
D
We can now compute the posterior distribution of the parameter
vector using (3.37) as
p(µ x ,a,b) Beta(µ a+N[1],b+N[0])
D
| ∝ |
= µN[1]+a−1(1 µ)N[0]+b−1. (3.42)
−
This confirms that the posterior distribution is indeed a Beta pdf, as
dictated by the choice of a Beta conjugate prior. Furthermore, the
posterior Beta distribution has parameters a+N[1] and b+N[0]. This
is consistent with the interpretation given above: the total number of
effective observations equal to “1” and “0” are a+N[1] and b+N[0],
respectively. As anticipated, the MAP estimate of µ can be obtained
by taking the mode of the posterior (3.37), yielding
a+N[1] 1
µ = − . (3.43)
MAP
a+b+N 2
−
As we discussed in the previous chapter, we have the limit µ
MAP
→
µ for N .
ML
→ ∞
Back to the Bayesian viewpoint, the predictive distribution (3.36)
is given as
p(x= 1x ,a,b) = p(µ x ,a,b)p(x = 1µ)dµ
D D
| | |
Z
N[1]+a
= E [µ] = (3.44)
µ∼p(µ|xD,a,b)
N +a+b
66 Probabilistic Models for Learning
wherewehave usedtheexpression(3.40)for themean of aBeta rv.We
observe that, if N is small, the predictive probability is approximately
equal to the mean of the prior, i.e., p(x= 1x ,a,b) a/(a+b); while,
D
| ≈
if N is large, as we have seen in the previous chapter, the predictive
probability tends to the ML solution, i.e., p(x= 1x ,a,b) N[1]/N.
D
| ≈
As anexampleof anon-conjugate prior,onecould choosethedistri-
bution of the natural parameter η, or equivalently of the logit function
(3.13) of µ, as Gaussian [92].
The following example illustrates the potential advantages, already
discussedinChapter2,oftheBayesianapproachinavoidingoverfitting.
Note that MAP would also yield similar results in this example.
Example 3.3. (Predicting online reviews) On an online shopping
platform,therearetwosellersofferingaproductatthesameprice.The
first has 30 positive reviews and 0 negative reviews, while the second
has 90 positive reviews and 10 negative reviews. Which one to choose?
To tackle this problem, we can learn a Beta-Bernoulli model to predict
whether the next review will be positive or not. We can compute the
probability that the next review is positive via the predictive distribu-
tion (3.44). The result is shown in Fig. 3.2: While the first seller has
a 100% positive rate, as opposed to the 90% rate of the first seller, we
prefer to choose the first seller unless the prior distribution is weak,
which translates here into the condition a= b . 3.
3.4.2 Dirichlet-Categorical Model
The Dirichlet-Categorical model generalizes the Beta-Bernoulli model
to the case of discrete observations that can take any number C of
values. The treatment follows along the same lines as for the Beta-
Bernoulli model, and hence we provide only a brief discussion. The
likelihood function can be written as
C−1
N[k]
p(x µ) = µ . (3.45)
D | k
k=0
Y
3.4. Bayesian Learning 67
1
0.95
first seller
0.9
second seller
0.85
0.8
0.75
2 4 6 8 10
Figure 3.2: Probability thatthenextreview ispositiveusingthepredictivedistri-
bution (3.44) for Example 3.3.
Theconjugate prioris theDirichlet distribution,ageneralization ofthe
Beta distribution:
C−1
p(µ α) = Dir(µ α) µ αk−1 , (3.46)
| | ∝ k
k=0
Y
where α is the hyperparameter representing the number of “prior”
k
observations equal to k. Note that the Dirichlet distribution is a joint
pdf for the entries of the mean vector µ. Mean and mode vectors for
the Dirichlet distribution are given as
α
E [µ] = (3.47)
µ∼Dir(µ|α) C−1α
j=0 j
α 1
mode [µ] P= − . (3.48)
µ∼Dir(µ|α) C−1α C
j=0 j −
The posterior of the parameters is thePDirichlet distribution
C−1
p(µ x ,α) µ
N[k]+αk−1
= Dir(µ α+N), (3.49)
| D ∝ k |
k=0
Y
in which we can again interpret α +N[k] as the effective number of
k
observationsequaltok.Fromthisdistribution,wecanobtaintheMAP
68 Probabilistic Models for Learning
estimate as the mode. Finally, the Bayesian predictive distribution is
N[k]+α
k
p(x= k x ,α) = . (3.50)
| D N + C−1α
j=0 j
One can check that the behavior in the twPo regimes of small and large
N is consistent with the discussion on the Beta-Bernoulli model.
3.4.3 Gaussian-Gaussian Model
As a last example, we consider continuous observations that are as-
sumed to have a Gaussian distribution (µ,σ2) with unknown mean
N
µ but known variance σ2. The likelihood function is hence p(x µ) =
D
|
N (x µ,σ2).TheconjugatepriorisalsoGaussian,namelyp(µ µ ,σ2)=
n=1N n | | 0 0
(µ µ ,σ2),withhyperparameters(µ ,σ2).Theposteriorp(µ x ,µ ,σ2) =
QN | 0 0 0 0 | D 0 0
(µ µ ,σ2 ) is hence Gaussian, with mean and variance satisfying
N | N N
σ2/N σ2
µ = µ + 0 µ (3.51)
N σ2+σ2/N 0 σ2+σ2/N ML
0 0
1 1 N
= + , (3.52)
σ2 σ2 σ2
N 0
wherewe recall that the ML estimate is µ = N x /N. Note that,
ML n=1 n
sincemean andmodeareequalfortheGaussian distribution,themean
P
µ isalsotheMAPestimateµ ofµ.Finally,thepredictivedistribu-
N MAP
tion is also Gaussian and given as p(xx ,µ ,σ2) = (xµ ,σ2+σ2 ).
| D 0 0 N | N N
Once again, as N grows large, the predictive distribution tends to that
returned by the ML approach, namely (xµ ,σ2).
ML
N |
Fig. 3.3 illustrates the relationship among ML, MAP and Bayesian
solutionsfortheGaussian-Gaussianmodel.Inallthepanels,thedotted
line represents the prior distribution, which is characterized by the pa-
rameters (µ = 1, σ2 = 3), and the dashed line is the true distribution
0 0
of the data, which is assumed to be Gaussian with parameters (µ = 0,
σ2 = 1), hence belonging to the assumed model. Each subfigure plots
a realization of N observations (circles), along with the ML solution
(diamond) and the MAP estimate (star). The solid lines represent the
Bayesian predictive distribution.
As N increases, we observe the following, already discussed, phe-
nomena:(i)theMLestimateµ consistently estimates thetruevalue
ML
3.5. Supervised Learning via Generalized Linear Models (GLM) 69
0.4
0.2
0
-5 0 5
fdp
0.4
0.2
0
-5 0 5
fdp
0.4
0.2
0
-5 0 5
fdp
0.4
0.2
0
-5 0 5
fdp
N =1
N =5
N =10
N =100
Figure 3.3: Gaussian-Gaussian model:priordistributionN(x|µ =1,σ2 =3)(dot-
0 0
ted), true distribution N(x|µ = 0,σ2 = 1) (dashed), N observations (circles), ML
solution (diamond), the MAP estimate (star), and Bayesian predictivedistribution
(solid line).
µ = 0; (ii) the MAP estimate µ tends to the ML estimate µ ;
MAP ML
and (iii) the Bayesian predictive distribution tends to the ML predic-
tive distribution,which inturncoincides withthetruedistributiondue
to (i).
3.5 Supervised Learning via Generalized Linear Models (GLM)
Distributionsintheexponentialfamilyarenotdirectlysuitabletoserve
as discriminative probabilisticmodels tobeusedin supervisedlearning
tasks.Inthis section, weintroduceGeneralized Linear Models (GLMs),
which are popular probabilistic discriminative models that build on
members of the exponential family.
70 Probabilistic Models for Learning
Toelaborate,let usdenoteasexponential( η) aprobabilisticmodel
·|
intheexponentialfamily,thatis,amodeloftheform(3.1)withnatural
parameters η. We also write exponential( µ) for a probabilistic model
·|
in the exponential family with mean parameters µ.
Using the notation adopted in the previous chapter, in its most
common form, a GLM defines the probability of a target variable t as
p(t x,W)= exponential(t η = Wx), (3.53)
| |
wherewerecallthatxisthevectorofexplanatoryvariables,andW here
denotesamatrixoflearnableweights ofsuitabledimensions.According
to (3.53), GLMs posit that the response variable t has a conditional
distributionfromtheexponentialfamily,withnaturalparametervector
η = Wx given by a linear function of the given explanatory variables
x with weights W. More generally, we may have the parametrization
p(t x,W)= exponential(t η = Wφ(x)) (3.54)
| |
forsomefeaturevectorφ()obtainedasafunctionoftheinputvariables
·
x (see next chapter).
While being the most common, the definition (3.54) is still not the
most general for GLMs. More broadly, GLMs can be interpreted as a
generalization of the linear model considered in the previous chapter,
whereby the mean parameters are defined as a linear function of a
featurevector.Thisviewpoint,describednext,mayalsoprovideamore
intuitive understanding of the modelling assumptions made by GLMs.
Recall that, in the recurring example of Chapter 2, the target vari-
able was modelled as Gaussian distributed with mean given by a linear
function of the covariates x. Extending the example, GLMs posit the
conditional distribution
p(t x,W) = exponential(t µ = g(Wφ(x))), (3.55)
| |
where the mean parameter vector is parametrized as a function of the
feature vector φ(x) through a generally non-linear vector function g()
·
of suitable dimensions. In words, GLM assume that the target variable
is a “noisy” measure of the mean µ = g(Wφ(x)).
When the function g() is selected as the gradient of the partition
·
function of the selected model, e.g., g() = A(), then, by (3.10), we
η
· ∇ ·
3.6. Maximum Entropy Property∗ 71
obtain the GLM (3.54). This choice for g() is typical, and is referred
·
to as the (inverse of the) canonical link function. For instance, the
linear regression model p(t x,w) = (t wTφ(x),σ2) used in Chapter 2
| N |
corresponds to a GLM with canonical link function. Throughout this
monograph, when referring to GLMs, we will consider models of the
form (3.54), or, equivalently (3.55), with canonical link function. For
further generalizations, we refer to [104, 15].
GLMs, especially in the form (3.54), are widely used. As we will
also discuss in the next chapter, learning the parameters of GLMs can
bedonebymeans of gradient ascent on theLLusingtheidentity (3.28)
and the chain rule of differentiation.
∗
3.6 Maximum Entropy Property
In this more technical section, we review the maximum entropy prop-
erty of the exponential family. Beside providing a compelling motiva-
tion for adopting models in this class, this property also illuminates
the relationship between natural and mean parameters.
The key result is the following: The distribution p(xη) in (3.1) ob-
|
tains the maximum entropy over all distributions p(x) that satisfy the
constraints E [u (x)] = µ forall k = 1,...,K. Recall that, asmen-
x∼p(x) k k
tioned in Chapter 2 and discussed in more details in Appendix A, the
entropy is a measure of randomness of a random variable. Mathemati-
cally, the distribution p(xη) solves the optimization problem
|
max H(p) s.t. E [u (x)]=µ for k = 1,...,K. (3.56)
x∼p(x) k k
p(x)
Each natural parameter η turns out to be the optimal Lagrange mul-
k
tiplier associated with the kth constraint (see [45, Ch. 6-7]).
To see the practical relevance of this result, suppose that the only
information available aboutsome data xis given by the means of given
functions u (x), k = 1,...,K. The probabilistic model (3.1) can then
k
be interpreted as encoding the least additional information about the
data, in the sense that it is the “most random” distribution under the
given constraints. This observation justifies the adoption of this model
by the maximum entropy principle.
72 Probabilistic Models for Learning
Furthermore, the fact that the exponential distribution solves the
maximum entropy problem (3.56) illuminates the relationship between
mean parameters µ and natural parameters η , as the natural
k k
{ } { }
parameter η is the optimal Lagrange multiplier associated with the
k
constraint E [u (x)] = µ .
x∼p(x) k k
Asanothernoteontheexponentialfamilyandinformation-theoretic
metrics, in Appendix B we provide discussion about the computation
oftheKLdivergencebetweentwodistributionsinthesameexponential
family but with different parameters.
∗
3.7 Energy-based Models
Ageneralization oftheexponentialfamilyisgivenbyprobabilisticmod-
els of the form
1
p(xη) = exp E (x η) , (3.57)
c c
| Z(η) − c | !
X
where functions E (x η) are referred to as energy functions and Z(η)
c c
|
is the partition function. Each energy function E (x η) generally de-
c c
|
pendsonasubsetx ofthevariablesinvectorx.Ifeachenergyfunction
c
depends linearly on the parameter vector η, we recover the exponen-
tial family discussed above. However, the energy functions may have a
more general non-linear form. An example is the function E (x η) =
c c
|
ln 1+(ηTx )2 corresponding to a Student’s t-distribution model6
c c
[83(cid:16)]. (cid:17)
Models in the form (3.57) encode information about the plausibil-
ity of different configurations of subsets of rvs x using the associated
c
energy value: a large energy entails an implausible configuration, while
a small energy identifies likely configurations. For example, a subset
of rvs x may tend to be equal with high probability, implying that
c
configurations in which this condition is not satisfied should have high
energy. Energy-based models are typically represented via the graphi-
cal formalism of Markov networks, as it will be discussed in Chapter
7.
6AStudent’st-distributioncanbeinterpretedasaninfinitemixtureofGaussians.
Asa result, it haslonger tails than a Gaussian pdf[23, Chapter2].
3.8. Some Advanced Topics∗ 73
With energy-based models, the key formula (3.28) of the gradient
of the LL with respect to the model’s parameters generalizes as
N
1 1
lnp(x η) = E (x η)+ E [ E (x η)].
η D η c n x∼p(x|η) η c
N∇ | −N ∇ | ∇ |
n=1 c c
XX X
(3.58)
Generalizing the discussion around (3.28), the first term in (3.58) is
the “positive” component that points in a direction that minimizes the
energy of the observations x ; while the second term is the “negative”
D
componentthat pushesupthe energy of the unobservedconfigurations.
Ingradient-ascent methods,theapplicationofthefirsttermistypically
referred to as the positive phase, while the second is referred to as the
negative phase. (The negative phase is even taken by some authors
to model the working of the brain while dreaming! [56]) While for
the exponential family the expectation in the negative phase readily
yields the mean parameters, for more general models, the evaluation of
this term is generally prohibitive and typically requires Monte Carlo
approximations, which are discussed in Chapter 8.
∗
3.8 Some Advanced Topics
Theprevioussectionshavefocusedontheimportantclassofparametric
probabilistic models in the exponential family. Here we briefly put the
content of this chapter in the broader context of probabilistic models
for machine learning. First, it is often useful to encode additional infor-
mation aboutthe relationships among the modelvariables by means of
a graphical formalism that will be discussed in Chapter 7. Second, the
problem of learning the distribution of given observations, which has
been studied here using parametric models, can also be tackled using
a non-parametric approach. Accordingly, the distribution is inferred
making only assumptions regarding its local smoothness. Typical tech-
niques in this family include Kernel Density Estimation and Nearest
Neighbor Density Estimation (see, e.g., [140]).
Furthermore, rather than learning individual probability densities,
in some applications, it is more useful to directly estimate ratios of
densities.Thisisthecase,forinstance,whenonewishestoestimatethe
74 Probabilistic Models for Learning
mutual information between two observed variables, or in two-sample
tests, whereby one needs to decide whether two sets of observations
have the same distribution or not. We refer to [140] for details. Finally,
there exist important scenarios in which it is not possible to assign an
explicit probabilistic model to given observations, butonly to specify a
generative mechanism. Theresultinglikelihood-free inference problems
are covered in [100], and will be further discussed in Chapter 6.
3.9 Summary
In this chapter, we have reviewed an important class of probabilistic
models that are widely used as components in learning algorithms for
both supervisedand unsupervisedlearning tasks. Among the key prop-
erties of members of this class, known as the exponential family, are
thesimpleformtaken bythegradientoftheLL,aswellastheavailabil-
ity of conjugate priors in the same family for Bayesian inference. An
extensivelistofdistributionsintheexponentialfamilyalongwithcorre-
spondingsufficientstatistics,measurefunctions,log-partition functions
and mappings between natural and mean parameters can be found in
[156]. More complex examples include the Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines (RBMs) to be discussed in Chapter 6 and Chapter 8. It is worth
mentioning that there are also distribution not in the exponential fam-
ily, such as the uniform distribution parametrized by its support. The
chapter also covered the important idea of applying exponential mod-
els to supervised learning via GLMs. Energy-based models were finally
discussed as an advanced topic.
The next chapter will present various applications of models in the
exponential family to classification problems.
Part II
Supervised Learning
4
Classification
The previous chapters have covered important background material on
learning and probabilistic models. In this chapter, we use the princi-
ples and ideas covered so far to study the supervised learning problem
of classification. Classification is arguably the quintessential machine
learningproblem,withthemostadvancedstate oftheartandthemost
extensive application to problems as varied as email spam detection
and medical diagnosis. Due to space limitations, this chapter cannot
providean exhaustive review of all existing techniques and latest devel-
opments, particularly in the active fieldof neuralnetwork research. For
instance, we do not cover decision trees here (see, e.g., [158]). Rather,
we will provide a principled taxonomy of approaches, and offer a few
representative techniques for each category within a unifiedframework.
We will specifically proceed by first introducing as preliminary mate-
rial the Stochastic Gradient Descent optimization method. Then, we
will discuss deterministic and probabilistic discriminative models, and
finally we will cover probabilistic generative models.
76
4.1. Preliminaries: Stochastic Gradient Descent 77
4.1 Preliminaries: Stochastic Gradient Descent
In this section, we review a technique that is extensively used in the
solution of optimization problems that define learning problems such
asMLandMAP(seeChapter2).ThetechniqueisknownasStochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD). SGD is introduced here and applied through-
out this monograph to other learning problems, including unsuper-
vised learning and reinforcement learning. Discussions about conver-
gence and about more advanced optimization techniques, which may
be skipped at a first reading, can be found in the Appendix A of this
chapter.
SGD addresses optimization problems of the form
N
min f (θ), (4.1)
n
θ
n=1
X
where θ is the vector of variables to be optimized. The cost function
f (θ) typically depends on the nth example in the training set . Fol-
n
D
lowing the notation set in Chapter 2, for example, in the case of dis-
criminative deterministic models, the conventional form for the cost
functions is
f (θ)= ℓ(t ,tˆ(x ,θ)), (4.2)
n n n
where ℓ is a loss function; (x ,t ) is the nth training example; and
n n
tˆ(x,θ) is a predictor parametrized by vector θ.
SGD requires the differentiability of cost functions f (). The idea
n
·
is to move at each iteration in the direction of maximum descent for
the cost function in (4.1), when the latter is evaluated as f (θ)
n∈S n
over a subset,or mini-batch, of samples from thetraining set.1 Given
S P
alearningratescheduleγ(i) andan initialization θ(0) of theparameters,
SGDrepeatsineachiteration untilconvergence thefollowingtwosteps:
Pick a mini-batch of S indices from the set 1,...,N according
• S { }
to some predetermined order or randomly;
1Strictly speaking, when the functions f (θ) are fixed and they are processed
n
following a deterministic order, the approach should be referred to as incremental
gradientmethod[22].However,thetermSGDisusedinmachinelearning,capturing
the fact that the choice of the mini-batches may be randomized, and that the sum
(4.1) is considered to be an empirical average of a target ensemble mean (see also
[101]).
78 Classification
Update the weights in the direction of steepest local descent as
•
γ(i)
θ(i) θ(i−1) f (θ) . (4.3)
← − S ∇
θ n |θ=θ(i−1)
n∈S
X
Thelearningrateγ(i) as a functionof theiteration iis generally consid-
ered to be part of the hyperparameters to be optimized via validation.
More discussion on this can be found in Appendix A of this chapter.
4.2 Classification as a Supervised Learning Problem
Classification is a supervised learning problem in which the label t can
take a discrete finite number of values. We refer to Sec. 2.1 for an in-
troduction tosupervisedlearning. Inbinaryclassification, each domain
point x is assigned to either one of two classes, which are denoted as
and and identified by the value of the label t as follows
0 1
C C
x if t = 0ort = 1 (4.4a)
0
∈ C −
x if t = 1. (4.4b)
1
∈ C
Note that we will find it convenient to use either the label t = 0 or
t = 1 to identify class . In the more general case of K classes
0
− C
, ,..., , we will instead prefer to use one-hot encoding (Sec.
0 1 K−1
C C C
3.2) by labelling a point x with a K 1 label t that contains all
k
∈ C ×
zeros except for a “1” entry at position k+1.
Example 4.1. Examples of binary classification include email spam
detection and creditworthiness assessment2. In the former case, the
domain point x may be encoded using the bag-of-words model, so that
each entry represents the count of the number of times that each term
inagivensetappearsintheemail.Inthelatterapplication,thedomain
vector xgenerally includesvaluableinformation todecideonwhethera
customer should be granted credit, such as credit score and salary (see,
e.g., [2]). Examples of multi-class classification include classification of
text documents into categories such as sports, politics or technology,
and labelling of images depending on the type of depicted item.
2Whilelessuseful,the“hotdog/nothotdog”classifierdesignedinthe“Silicon
Valley” HBO show (Season 4) is also a valid example.
4.2. Classification as a Supervised Learning Problem 79
The binary classification problem is illustrated in Fig. 4.1. Given
a training set of labeled examples x , n = 1,...,N, the problem is
n
D
to assign a new example x to either class or . In this particular
0 1
C C
standard data set, the two variables in each vector x measure the
n
sepal length and sepal width of an iris flower. The latter may belong
to either the setosa or virginica family, as encoded by the label t and
n
representedinthefigurewithdifferentmarkers.Throughout,wedenote
as D the dimension of the domain point x (D = 2 in Fig. 4.1).
4.5
4
?
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the binary (K = 2 classes) classification problem with
a domain space of dimension D = 2: to which class should the new example x be
assigned?
FollowingthetaxonomyintroducedinChapter2,wecandistinguish
the following modeling approaches, which will be reviewed in the given
order throughout the rest of this chapter.
Discriminative deterministic models: Model directly the deter-
•
ministic mapping between domain point and label via a parametrized
function t = tˆ(x).
Discriminative probabilistic models: Model the probability of a
•
pointxbelongingtoclass viaaparametrizedconditional pmfp(t x),
k
C |
with the relationship between t and defined in (4.4). We will also
k
C
80 Classification
write p( x) for the discriminative probability when more convenient.
k
C |
Generative probabilistic model: Model the joint distribution of
•
domain point and class label by specifying the prior distribution p(t),
or p( ), and the class-dependent probability distribution p(xt), or
k
C |
p(x ), of the domain points within each class.
k
|C
Discriminative models are arguably to be considered as setting the
current state of the art on classification, including popular methods
suchasSupportVectorMachine(SVM)anddeepneuralnetworks.Gen-
erative models are potentially more flexible and powerful as they allow
to capture distinct class-dependent properties of the covariates x.
4.3 Discriminative Deterministic Models
In this section, we discuss binary classification using discriminative de-
terministic models. Owing to their practical importance and to their
intuitive geometric properties, we focus on linear models, whereby the
binary prediction tˆ(x) is obtained by applying a threshold rule on a
decision variable a(x,w˜) obtained as a linear function of the learnable
weights w˜ (the notation will be introduced below). Note that the deci-
sion variable a(x,w˜) may not be a linear function of the covariates x.
As we will discuss, this class of models underlie important algorithms
that are extensively used in practical applications such as SVM. A
brief discussion on multi-class classification using deterministic models
is provided attheend of this section. In thenexttwo sections, wecover
discriminative probabilistic models, including GLMs and more general
models.
4.3.1 Model
In their simplest form, linear discriminative deterministic classification
models are of the form
tˆ(x,w˜) = sign(a(x,w˜)), (4.5)
4.3. Discriminative Deterministic Models 81
where the activation, or decision variable, is given as
D
a(x,w˜) = w x +w
d d 0
d=1
X
= wTx+w = w˜Tx˜, (4.6)
0
and we have defined the weight vectors w = [w w ]T and w˜ =
1 D
···
[w w w ]T, as well as the extended domain point x˜ = [1 xT]T,
0 1 D
···
with x = [x x ]T. The sign function in decision rule (4.5) outputs
1 D
···
1 if its argument is positive, and 0 or 1 if the argument is negative
−
depending on the assumed association rule in (4.4).
Geometricinterpretation:classification,geometricandfunc-
tional margins. The decision rule (4.5) defines a hyperplane that sep-
arates the domain points classified as belonging to either of the two
classes. A hyperplane is a line when D = 2; a plane when D = 3; and,
more generally, a D 1-dimensional affine subspace [28] in the domain
−
space. The hyperplane is defined by the equation a(x,w˜) = 0, with
points on either side characterized by either positive or negative values
of the activation a(x,w˜). The decision hyperplane can be identified as
described in Fig. 4.2: the vector w defines the direction perpendicular
to the hyperplane and w / w is the bias of the decision surface in
0
− || ||
the direction w.//
Figure 4.2: Key definitions for a binary linear classifier.
82 Classification
Givenapointx,itisusefultomeasuretheconfidencelevelatwhich
the classifier assigns x to the class identified through rule (4.5). This
can be done by quantifying the Euclidean distance between x and the
decisionhyperplane.AsillustratedinFig.4.2,thisdistance,alsoknown
as classification margin, can be computed as a(x,w˜) / w .
| | k k
A point x has a true label t, which may or may not coincide with
the one assigned by rule (4.5). To account for this, we augment the
definition of margin by giving a positive sign to correctly classified
points and a negative sign to incorrectly classified points. Assuming
that t takes values in 1,1 , this yields the definition of geometric
{− }
margin as
t a(x,w˜)
· , (4.7)
w
k k
whose absolute value equals the classification margin. For future refer-
ence, we also define the functional margin as t a(x,w˜).
·
Feature-based model. The model described above, in which the
activation isalinear function oftheinputvariablesx,hasthefollowing
drawbacks.
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-4 -2 0 2 4
Figure 4.3: A non-linearly separable training set.
1) Bias: As suggested by the example in Fig. 4.3, dividing the do-
main of the covariates x by means of a hyperplane may fail to capture
4.3. Discriminative Deterministic Models 83
the geometric structure of the data. In particular, in the example, the
two classes are not linearly separable in the space of the covariates – no
hyperplane separates exactly the domain points in the two classes. In
such cases, classifiers of the form (4.5) may yield large average losses
due to the bias induced by the choice of the model (see Sec. 2.3.3).
2) Overfitting: When D is large and the data points N are insuffi-
cient, learning the D+1 weights of the classifier may cause overfitting.
3)Data-dependent domain size:Insomeapplications,thedimension
D may even change from data point to data point, that is, it may vary
with the index n. For example, a text x , e.g., represented in ASCII
n
format, will have a different dimension D depending on the number
n
of words in the text.
To address these problems, a powerful approach is that of working
with feature vectors φ (x), k = 1,...,D′, rather than directly with
k
the covariates x, as the inputto the classifier. A feature φ (x) is a, gen-
k
erally non-linear, function of the vector x. It is important to emphasize
that these functions are fixed and not learned.
Choosing a number of features D′ > D, which yields an overcom-
plete representation of the data point x, may help against bias; while
opting for an undercomplete representation with D′ < D may help
solve the problem of overfitting. Furthermore, the same number of fea-
tures D′, e.g., word counts in a bag-of-words model, may be selected
irrespective of the size of the data point, addressing also the last prob-
lem listed above.
The feature-based model can be expressed as (4.5) with activation
D′
a(x,w˜) = w φ (x) = w˜Tφ(x), (4.8)
k k
k=1
X
where we have defined the feature vector φ(x) = [φ (x) φ (x)]T.
1 D′
···
Note that model (4.5) is a special case of (4.8) with the choice φ(x) =
[1 xT]T.
4.3.2 Learning
As seen in Sec. 2.3.3, learning of deterministic discriminative models
can be carried out by means of ERM for a given loss function ℓ. Fur-
84 Classification
thermore, as discussed in Sec. 2.3.5, overfitting can be controlled by
introducing a regularization function R(w˜) on the weight vector w˜. Ac-
cordingly, a deterministic predictor tˆ(x,w˜) as defined in (4.5) can be
learned by solving the regularized ERM problem
λ
min L (w˜)+ R(w˜), (4.9)
D
w˜ N
with the empirical risk
N
1
L (w˜) = ℓ t ,tˆ(x ,w˜) . (4.10)
D n n
N
n X =1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
In (4.9), the hyperparameter λ should be selected via validation as
explained in Sec. 2.3.5.
Extending the examples discussed in Sec. 2.3.5, the regularization
term is typically convex but possibly not differentiable, e.g., R(w˜) =
w˜ .Furthermore,anaturalchoice forthelossfunctionisthe0-1loss,
1
k k
which implies that the generalization loss L in (2.2) is the probability
p
of classification error.
In the special case of linearly separable data sets, the resulting
ERM problem can be converted to a Linear Program (LP) [133]. Since
it is in practice impossible to guarantee the separability condition a
priori, one needs generally to solve directly the ERM problem (4.9).
The function sign() has zero derivative almost everywhere, and is not
·
differentiable when the argument is zero. For this reason, it is difficult
to tackle problem (4.9) via standard gradient-based optimization algo-
rithms such as SGD. It is instead often useful to consider surrogate
loss functions ℓ(t,a) that depend directly on the differentiable (affine)
activation a(x,w˜). The surrogate loss function should preferably be
convex in a, and hence in w˜, ensuring that the resulting regularized
ERM problem
N
λ
min ℓ(t ,a(x ,w˜))+ R(w˜) (4.11)
n n
w˜ N
n=1
X
is convex. This facilitates optimization [28], and, under suitable addi-
tional conditions, guarantees generalization [133] (see also next chap-
ter). The surrogate loss function should also ideally bean upperbound
4.3. Discriminative Deterministic Models 85
on the original loss function. In this way, the actual average loss is
guaranteed to be smaller than the value attained under the surrogate
loss function. Examples of surrogate functions that will be considered
in the following can be found in Fig. 4.4.
3
2.5 hinge
exponential
2
logistic
1.5
1
0-1
0.5
perceptron
0
-2 -1 0 1 2
Figure 4.4: Some notable surrogate loss functions for binary classification along
with the0-1 loss.
Perceptron Algorithm
The perceptron algorithm is one of the very first machine learning and
AI algorithms. It was introduced by Frank Rosenblatt at the Cornell
Aeronautical Laboratory in 1957 to much fanfarein the popularpress–
itis “theembryo of an electronic computerthat [theNavy] expects will
be able to walk, talk, see, write, reproduce itself and be conscious of
its existence.” reported The New York Times [144]. The algorithm was
implemented using analog electronics and demonstrated impressive –
for the time – classification performance on images [23].
Using the feature-based model for generality, the perceptron algo-
rithm attempts to solve problem (4.11) with the surrogate perceptron
86 Classification
loss function defined as
ℓ(t,a(x,w˜)) =max(0, t a(x,w˜)). (4.12)
− ·
The perceptron loss assigns zero cost to a correctly classified example
x, whose functional margin t a(x,w˜) is positive, and a cost equal to
·
the absolute value of the functional margin for a misclassified example,
whose functional margin is negative. A comparison with the 0-1 loss
is shown in Fig. 4.4. The perceptron algorithm tackles problem (4.11)
with λ = 0 via SGD with mini-batch size S = 1. The resulting algo-
rithm works as follows. First, the weights w˜(0) are initialized. Then,for
each iteration i = 1,2,...
Pick a training example (x ,t ) uniformly with replacement from
n n
•
;
D
If the example is correctly classified, i.e., if t a(x ,w˜) 0, do not
n n
• ≥
update the weights: w˜(i) w˜(i−1);
←
If the example is not correctly classified, i.e., if t a(x ,w˜) < 0,
n n
•
update the weights as:
w˜(i) w˜(i−1) ℓ(t ,a(x ,w˜)) = w˜(i−1) +φ(x )t .
← −∇
w˜ n n |w˜=w˜(i−1) n n
(4.13)
It can be proved that, at each step, the algorithm reduces the term
ℓ(t ,a(x ,w˜)) in the perceptron loss related to the selected training
n n
example n if the latter is misclassified. It can also be shown that, if
the training set is linearly separable, the perceptron algorithm finds a
weightvectorw˜thatseparatesthetwoclassesexactlyinafinitenumber
of steps [23]. However, convergence can be slow. More importantly, the
perceptronfails on training sets that arenot linearly separable, such as
the“XOR”trainingset = ([0,0]T,0),([0,1]T,1),([1,0]T,1),([1,1]T,0)
D { }
[97]. This realization came as a disappointment and contributed to the
first so-called AI winter period characterized by a reduced funding for
AI and machine learning research [154].
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
SVM, introduced in its modern form by Cortes and Vapnik [37] in
1995, was among the main causes for a renewal of interest in machine
4.3. Discriminative Deterministic Models 87
learning and AI. For this section, we will write explicitly (and with a
slight abuse of notation) the activation as
a(x,w˜) = w +wTφ(x), (4.14)
0
in order to emphasize the offset w . SVM solves the regularized ERM
0
problem (4.11) with the surrogate hinge loss function
ℓ(t,a(x,w˜)) = max(0,1 t a(x,w˜)), (4.15)
− ·
andwiththeregularization functionR(w˜)= w 2.Note thatthelatter
k k
involvesonlythevectorwandnotthebiasweightw –wewillseebelow
0
why this is a sensible choice. The hinge loss function is also shown in
Fig. 4.4.
Therefore,unliketheperceptronalgorithm,SVMincludesaregular-
ization term, which was shown to ensure strong theoretical guarantees
in terms of generalization error [39]. Furthermore, rather than relying
on SGD,SVMattempts todirectly solve theregularized ERMproblem
using powerful convex optimization techniques [28].
To start, we need to deal with the non-differentiability of the hinge
loss (4.15). This can be done by introducing auxiliary variables z , one
n
for each training example n. In fact, imposing the inequality z
n
≥
ℓ(t ,a(x ,w˜)) yields the following equivalent problem
n n
N
λ
min z + w 2 (4.16a)
n
w˜,z N k k
n=1
X
s.t. t a(x ,w˜) 1 z (4.16b)
n n n
· ≥ −
z 0 for n=1,...,N, (4.16c)
n
≥
wherez = [z z ]T.Theequivalencebetweentheoriginalregularized
1 N
···
ERM problem and problem (4.16) follows from the fact that any opti-
malvalueofthevariables(w˜,z)mustsatisfyeitherconstraint(4.16b)or
(4.16c) with equality. This can be seen by contradiction: a solution for
which both constraints are loose for some n could always be improved
bydecreasingthevalueofthecorrespondingvariablesz untilthemost
n
stringent of the two constraints in (4.16) is met. As a consequence, at
an optimal solution, we have the equality z = ℓ(t ,a(x ,w˜)).
n n n
88 Classification
The advantage of formulation (4.16) is that the problem is convex,
andcan hencebesolved usingpowerfulconvex optimization techniques
[28]. In fact, the cost function is strictly convex, and thus the optimal
solution is unique [28]. Furthermore, the optimal solution has an in-
teresting interpretation in the special case in which the training data
set is linearly separable. As we will see, this interpretation justifies the
name of this technique.
Linearly separable sets and support vectors. When the data
set is linearly separable, it is possible to find a vector w˜ such that all
points are correctly classified, and hence all the functional margins are
positive, i.e., t a(x ,w˜) > 0 for n = 1,...,N. Moreover, by scaling the
n n
·
vector w˜, it is always possible to ensure that the minimum functional
margin equals 1 (or any other positive value). This means that we can
impose without loss of optimality the inequalities t a(x ,w˜) 1 for
n n
· ≥
n = 1,...,N and hence set z = 0 in problem (4.16). This yields the
optimization problem
min w 2 (4.17a)
w˜ k k
s.t. t a(x ,w˜) 1 for n=1,...,N. (4.17b)
n n
· ≥
The problem above can be interpreted as the maximization of the
minimum geometric margin across all training points. To see this, note
that, under the constraint (4.17b), the minimum geometric margin can
be computed as
t a(x ,w˜) 1
n n
min = . (4.18)
n=1,...,N w w
k k k k
Furthermore, we call the vectors that satisfy the constraints (4.17b)
with equality, i.e., t a(x ,w˜) = 1, as support vectors, since they sup-
n n
·
port the hyperplanes parallel to the decision hyperplane at the mini-
mum geometric margin. At an optimum value w˜, there are at least two
support vectors, one on either side of the separating hyperplane (see
[23, Fig. 7.1]).
Using Lagrange duality, the supportvectors can beeasily identified
by observingtheoptimal values α of themultipliers associated with
n
{ }
the constraints (4.16b). Support vectors x correspond to positive La-
n
grange multipliers α > 0 (see, e.g., [23]), while all other points have
n
4.3. Discriminative Deterministic Models 89
zero Lagrange multipliers. Note that the Lagrange multipliers are re-
turned by standard solvers such as the ones implemented by the CVX
toolbox in MATLAB [58].
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1
Figure 4.5: Example of binary classification with SVM using polynomial features
up to degree M (λ/N =0.2).
Example 4.2. In the example in Fig. 4.5, the illustrated N = 80
training samples are fed to a SVM using the monomial feature vec-
tor φ(x) = [1 x x xM xM] and λ/N = 0.2 for given model orders
1 2 ··· 1 2
M. The decision boundary is shown using dashed and solid lines. It is
seen that, using a sufficiently large order (here M = 3), SVM is able to
effectively partition the two samples in the two classes. Furthermore,
even with larger values of M (here M = 8), SVM appears not to suffer
from significant overfitting thanks to the quadratic regularization term.
The optimization problem (4.16) may be conveniently tackled by
using Lagrange duality techniques. This approach also allows one to
naturallyintroducethepowerfultool ofkernelmethods.Theinterested
reader can find this discussion in Appendix B of this chapter.
90 Classification
∗
4.3.3 Multi-Class Classification
Here we briefly describe classification scenarios with K > 2 classes. As
a first observation, it is possible to build multi-class classifiers based
solely on multiple binary classifiers, such as SVM. This can be done
by following one of two general strategies, namely one-versus-the-rest
and one-versus-one [23, Chapter 7]. The one-versus-the-rest approach
trains K separate binary classifiers, say k = 1,...,K, with the kth
classifier operating on the examples relative to class against the
k
C
examples from all other classes. The one-versus-one method, instead,
trains K(K 1)/2 binary classifiers, one for each pair of classes. Both
−
approaches can yield ambiguities in classification [23, Chapter 7].
4.4 Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Generalized Linear Mod-
els
Discriminative probabilistic models are potentially more powerfulthan
deterministic ones since they allow to model sources of uncertainty
in the label assignment to the input variables. This randomness may
model noise, labelling errors, e.g., for crowdsourced labels, and/or the
residual uncertainty in the classification rule due to the availability of
limited data. Probabilistic models can also more naturally accommo-
date the presence of more than two classes by producing a probability
distribution over the possible label values.
In this section, we study GLMs, which were introduced in Sec. 3.5.
We recall that a GLM (3.54) posits that the conditional pmf p(t x),
|
or p( x), is a member of the exponential family in which the natural
k
C |
parameter vector η is given as a linear function of a feature vector
φ(x), i.e., η = Wφ(x) for weight matrix W.3 It is noted that GLMs are
not linear: only the unnormalized log-likelihood is linear in the weight
matrix W (see Sec. 3.2). We start by discussing binary classification
and then cover the multi-class case in Sec. 4.4.3.
3See Sec. 3.5 for a more general definition.
4.4. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Generalized Linear Models 91
4.4.1 Model
For classification, the label t can take a finite number of values, and
it can hence be described by a Bernoulli variable in the binary case
or, more generally, by a Categorial variable (see Chapter 3). The GLM
(3.54) for binary classification is known as logistic regression, and it
assumes the predictive distribution
p(t = 1x) = σ(w˜Tφ(x)). (4.19)
|
We recall that σ(a) = (1 + exp( a))−1 is the sigmoid function (see
−
Chapter 2). We also observe that
σ( a) = 1 σ(a), (4.20)
− −
whichimpliesthatwecanwritep(t = 0x) = 1 σ(w˜Tφ(x)) = σ( w˜Tφ(x)).
| − −
Intuitively, the sigmoid function in (4.19) can be thought of as a “soft”
versionofthethresholdfunctionsign(a)usedbythedeterministicmod-
els studied in the previous section.
We emphasize that the logistic regression model (4.19) is a GLM
sinceitamountsto aBernoullidistribution,whichisintheexponential
family, with natural parameter vector η = w˜Tφ(x) as in
t x,w Bern(t η = w˜Tφ(x)). (4.21)
| ∼ |
Inference. Before discussing learning, we observe that inference is
straightforward. In fact, once the discriminative model (4.19) is known,
the average 0-1 loss, that is, the probability of error, is minimized by
choosing the label according to the following rule
C1 1
p( x) =p(t = 1x) ≷ , (4.22)
1
C | | 2
C0
C1
or equivalently w˜Tφ(x) ≷ 0.
C0
92 Classification
4.4.2 Learning
Consider first ML. The NLL function can be written as
N
lnp(t x ,w˜) = lnp(t x ,w˜) (4.23)
D D n n
− | − |
n=1
X
N
= t ln(y )+(1 t )ln(1 y ) , (4.24)
n n n n
− { − − }
n=1
X
where we have defined y = σ(w˜Tφ(x )). The NLL (4.23) is also re-
n n
ferred to as the cross entropy loss criterion, since the term tln(y)
− −
(1 t)ln(1 y)is thecross-entropy H((t,1 t) (y,1 y)) (see Sec. 2.6).
− − − || −
We note that the cross-entropy can be used to obtain upper bounds on
the probability of error (see, e.g., [50]). The ML problem of minimizing
the NLL is convex (see Sec. 3.1), and hence it can be solved either
directly using convex optimization tools, or by using iterative methods
such as SGD or Newton (the latter yields the iterative reweighed least
square algorithm [23, p. 207]).
The development of these methods leverages the expression of the
gradientoftheLLfunction(3.28)(usedwithN = 1)fortheexponential
family. To elaborate, using the chain rule for differentiation, we can
write the gradient
lnp(t x,w˜) = lnBern(t η) (w˜Tφ(x)), (4.25)
w˜ η η=w˜φ(x) w˜
∇ | ∇ | | ×∇
which, recalling that ln(Bern(t η)) = (t σ(η)) (cf. (3.28)), yields
η
∇ | −
lnp(t x,w˜) = (t y)φ(x). (4.26)
w˜
∇ | −
Evaluating the exact posterior distribution for the Bayesian ap-
proach turns out to be generally intractable due to the difficulty in
normalizing the posterior
N
p(w ) p(w) p(t x ,w˜). (4.27)
n n
|D ∝ |
n=1
Y
We refer to [23, p. 217-220] for an approximate solution based on
Laplace approximation. Other useful approximate methods will be dis-
cussed in Chapter 8.
4.4. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Generalized Linear Models 93
As a final remark, with bipolar labels, i.e., t 1,+1 , the cross-
∈ {− }
entropy loss function can be written as
N
lnp(t x ,w˜) = ln(1+exp( t a(x ,w˜)). (4.28)
D D n n
− | −
n=1
X
This formulation shows that logistic regression can be thought of as an
ERM method with loss function ℓ(t,a(x,w˜)) = ln(1+exp( ta(x,w˜)),
−
which is seen in Fig. 4.4 to be a convex surrogate loss of the 0-1 loss.
Mixturemodels.∗ Asseen,theBayesianapproachobtainsthepre-
dictive distribution by averaging over multiple models p(t x,w) with
|
respect to the parameters’ posterior p(w ) (cf. (2.34)). The result-
|D
ing model hence mixes the predictions returned by multiple discrimi-
native models p(t x,w) to obtain the predictive distribution p(t x) =
| |
p(w )p(t x,w)dw. As we briefly discuss below, it is also possible to
|D |
learn mixture models within a frequentist framework.
R
ConsiderK probabilisticdiscriminativemodelsp(t x,w ),k = 1,...,K,
k
|
such as logistic regression. The mixture model is defined as
K
p(t x,θ)= π p(t x,w ). (4.29)
k k
| |
k=1
X
In this model, the vector θ of learnable parameters includes the prob-
ability vector π, which defines the relative weight of the K models,
and the vectors w ,...,w for the K constituent models. As discussed,
1 K
in the Bayesian approach, the weights π are directly obtained by us-
k
ing the rules of probability, as done in (4.27). Within a frequentist
approach, instead, ML training is typically performed via a specialized
algorithm, which will bedescribed inChapter 6, known as Expectation
Maximization (EM).
Mixture models increase the capacity of discriminative models and
hence allow to learn more complex relationships between covariates
and labels. In particular, a mixture model, such as (4.29), has a num-
ber of parameters that increases proportionally with the number K of
constituent models. Therefore, the capacity of a mixture model grows
largerwithK.Asanexample,thisincreasedcapacity maybeleveraged
by specializing each constituent model p(t x,w ) to a different area of
k
|
the covariate domain.
94 Classification
Given their larger capacity, mixture models may be prone to over-
fitting. A way to control overfitting will be discussed in Sec. 4.7.
4.4.3 Multi-Class Classification
In the case of K classes, the relevant exponential family distribution is
Categorical with natural parameters depending linearly on the feature
vector. This yields the following discriminative model as a generaliza-
tion of logistic regression
tx,W Cat(t η = Wφ(x)), (4.30)
| ∼ |
where the label vector t is defined using one-hot encoding (Chapter 3)
andW is amatrix of weights. We can alsoequivalently writethevector
of probabilities for the K classes as
eη0
K−1eηk
k=0
y = softmax(Wφ(x))=  P . . .  , (4.31)
 eηK−1 
 
 K−1eηk
 k=0 
 
where y = [y y ]T with y = p( x); Pand η = wT φ(x) with wT
1 ··· K k C k | k k+1 k
being the kth row of the weight matrix W.
Learning follows as for logistic regression. To briefly elaborate on
this point, the NLL can be written as the cross-entropy function
N
lnp(t x ,W) = lnp(t x ,W)
D D n n
− | − |
n=1
X
N
= tT ln(y ), (4.32)
− n n
n=1
X
where the logarithm is applied element by element, and we have y =
n
softmax(Wφ(x )). Note that each term in (4.32) can be expressed as
n
the cross-entropy tT ln(y ) = H(t y ). The ML problem is again
− n n n || n
convex and hence efficiently solvable. The gradient of the NLL can be
again found using the general formula (3.28) for exponential models
and the chain rule for derivatives. We can write
lnp(t x,W)= lnCat(t η) (Wφ(x)), (4.33)
W η η=Wφ(x) W
∇ | ∇ | | ×∇
4.4. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Generalized Linear Models 95
which yields
lnp(t x,W) = (t y)φ(x)T. (4.34)
W
∇ | −
4.4.4 Relation to Neural Networks
GLM models of the form (4.30), or (4.19) in the special case of binary
classification, can be interpreted in terms of the neural network shown
in Fig. 4.6. A neural network consists of a directed graph of computing
elements, knownas neurons.Each neuronapplies adeterministic trans-
formation of its inputs, as defined by the incoming edges, to produce a
scalar output on its outgoing edge.
In Fig. 4.6, the inputvector x is firstprocessed by a hidden layer of
neurons, in which each kth neuron computes the feature φ (x). Then,
k
each kth neuron in the output layer applies the kth element of the
softmax non-linearity (4.31) to the numbers produced by the hidden
neurons in order to compute the probability y = p( x). Note that,
k k
C |
in the case of binary classification, only one output neuron is sufficient
in order to compute the probability (4.19). It is also important to em-
phasize that only the weights between hidden and output layers are
learned, while the operation of the neurons in the hidden layer is fixed.
Figure 4.6: GLM as a three-layer neural network with learnable weights only be-
tween hidden and outputlayers.
We remark that one should not confuse a graph such as the one in
Fig. 4.6 with the BN representation previously seen in Fig. 2.7, which
will be further discussed in Chapter 7. In fact, while BNs represent
probability distributions, diagrams of neural networks such as in Fig.
4.6 describe deterministic functional relations among variables. This
96 Classification
is despite the fact that the output layer of the network in Fig. 4.6
computes a vector of probabilities. In other words, while the nodes of a
BN are rvs, those in the graph of a neural network are computational
nodes.
“Extreme machine learning”.∗ An architecture in which the
features φ(x) are selected via random linear combinations of the input
vector x is sometimes studied under the rubric of “extreme machine
learning” [67]. The advantage of this architecture as compared to deep
neuralnetworkswithmorehiddenlayersandfulllearningoftheweights
(Sec. 4.5) is its low complexity.
4.5 Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Beyond GLM
Figure 4.7: A multi-layerneural network.
As depicted in Fig. 4.6, GLMs can be interpreted as three-layer neural
networks in which the only hidden layer computes fixed features. The
fixed features are then processed by the output classification layer. In
various applications, determining suitable features is a complex and
time-consuming task that requires significant domain knowledge. Mov-
ing beyond GLMs allows us to work with models that learn not only
the weights used by the output layer for classification, but also the vec-
tor of features φ(x) on which the output layer operates. This approach
yields a much richer set of models, which, along with suitable learning
algorithms, has led to widely publicized breakthroughs in applications
ranging from speech translation to medical diagnosis.
As a prominent example of beyond-GLM classification models, we
describe here feed-forward multi-layer neural networks, or deep neural
4.5. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Beyond GLM 97
networks whenthehiddenlayers arein largenumber.We notethat, be-
side yielding state-of-the-art classification algorithms, multi-layer feed-
forward networks are also key components of the computational theory
of mind [116].
4.5.1 Model
As illustrated in Fig. 4.7, feed-forward multi-layer networks consist of
multiple layers with learnable weights. Focusing on multi-class classifi-
cation, we have the chain of vectors x h1 hL y, where
→ → ··· → →
x is the D 1 input (observed) vector; y is the K 1 vector of output
× ×
probabilities for the K classes; and hl represents the vector of outputs
at the lth hidden layer. The number of neurons in each hidden layer
is a hyperparameter to be optimized via validation or Bayesian meth-
ods (Chapter 2). Note that the adopted numbering of the layers is not
universally accepted, and the reverse ordering is also used.
Referring to Fig. 4.7, we can write the operation of the neural net-
work through the functional relations
h1 = h(a1) with a1 = W1x (4.35a)
hl = h(al) with al = Wlhl−1 (4.35b)
for l = 2,...,L (4.35c)
y = softmax(aL+1) with aL+1=WL+1hL. (4.35d)
The non-linear function h() is applied element-wise and is typically
·
selected as a sigmoid, such as the logistic sigmoid or the hyperbolic
tangent, or else, as has become increasingly common, the Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) h(a) = max(0,a). In (4.35), we have defined the
activation vectors al for the hidden layers l = 1,...,L, and the matrices
of weights Wl, l = 1,...,L+1, whose dimensions depend on the size of
the hidden layers. We denote the tensor4 of all weights as W.
Thelearnableweightsofthehiddenlayers encodethefeaturevector
φ(x) = h usedby thelastlayer forclassification. With multi-layer net-
L
works, we have then moved from having fixed features defined a priori
4A tensor is a generalization of a matrix in that it can have more than two
dimensions, see, e.g., [35].
98 Classification
by vector φ(x) in linear models to designing optimal features that max-
imize the classifier’s performance in non-linear models. Furthermore,
in multi-layer networks, the learned features h1,...,hL tend to progress
from low-level features in the lower layers, such as edges in an image,
to higher-level concepts and categories, such as “cats” or “dogs”, in the
higher layers [56].
4.5.2 Learning
Training deep neural networks is an art [56]. The basic underlying al-
gorithm is backpropagation, first proposed in 1969 and then reinvented
in the mid-1980s [126, 125]. However, in practice, a number of tricks
are required in order to obtain state-of-the-art performance, including
methods to combat overfitting, such as dropout. Covering these solu-
tions would require a separate treatise, and here we refer to [64, 56] for
an extensive discussion.
Backpropagation – or backprop for short – extends the derivation
done in (4.34) to evaluate the gradient of the LL to be used within
an SGD-based algorithm. Again, the main ingredients are the general
formula(3.28)forexponentialmodelsandthechainruleforderivatives.
Toelaborate,selectagiventrainingexample(x ,t ) = (x,t)tobeused
n n
in an iteration of SGD. Backprop computes the derivative of the NLL,
or cross-entropy loss function, L(W) = lnp(t x,W) = tT lny (cf.
− | −
(4.32)), where the output y is obtained via the relations (4.35). It is
important to note that, unlike the linear models studied above, the
cross-entropy for multi-layer is generally a non-convex function of the
weights.
Backprop computes the gradients with respect to the weight matri-
ces by carrying out the following phases.
Forward pass:Givenx,applyformulas(4.35)toevaluatea1,h1,a2,
•
h2,...,aL,hL, and y.
Backward pass: Given a1,h1,a2,h2,...,aL,hL,aL+1,y and t, com-
•
4.5. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Beyond GLM 99
pute
δL+1 = (y t) (4.36a)
−
δl = (Wl+1)Tδl+1 h′(al) for l = L,L 1,...,1 (4.36b)
· −
L(W)= δl(hl−1)T for l = 1,2,...,L+1, (4.36c)
∇Wl
whereh′() denotes the firstderivative of the function h(); the product
· ·
is taken element-wise; and we set h0 = x.
·
Backproprequiresaforwardpassandabackwardpassforeverycon-
sidered training example. The forward pass uses the neural network as
defined by equations (4.35). This entails multiplications by the weight
matrices Wl in order to compute the activation vectors, as well as ap-
plications of the non-linear function h(). In contrast, the backward
·
pass requires only linear operations, which, by (4.36b), are based on
the transpose (Wl)T of the weight matrix Wl used in the forward pass.
The derivatives (4.36c) computed during the backward pass are of
the general form
L(W)= hl−1 δl, (4.37)
∇w i l j i × j
where wl is the (i,j)th element of matrix Wl corresponding to the
ij
weight between the pre-synaptic neuron j in layer l 1 and the post-
−
synaptic neuron i in layer l; hl−1 is the output of the pre-synaptic
i
neuron i; and δl is the back-propagated error. The back-propagated
j
error assigns “responsibility” for the error y t measured at the last
−
layer (layer L+1)toeach synapticweightwl betweenneuronj inlayer
ij
l 1 and neuron i in layer l. The back-propagated error is obtained via
−
the linear operations in (4.36b).
100 Classification
-4 1
0.9
-3
0.8
-2
0.7
-1
0.6
0 0.5
0.4
1
0.3
2
0.2
3 0.1
4
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Figure 4.8: Probabilitythattheclasslabelisthesameasfortheexamplesmarked
with circles according totheoutput of afeed-forward multi-layernetwork with one
hidden layer (L = 1) and six hidden neurons (with sigmoid non-linearity). The
probabilityisrepresentedbythecolormapillustratedbythebarontherightofthe
figure.Forreference, thesolid linerepresentthedecision linefor logistic regression.
Example 4.3. In the example in Fig. 4.8, the illustrated N = 300
training examples are used to train a logistic regression, i.e., GLM,
model and a feed-forward multi-layer network with one hidden layer
(L = 1)and six hiddenneuronswith sigmoid non-linearity h(x) = σ(x).
Thelogisticmodeluseslinearfeaturesφ(x) = [1 x]T.Bothnetworksare
trainedusingSGD.Forlogisticregression,thedecisionlineisillustrated
as a solid line, whilefor themulti-layer network we plot the probability
that the class label is the same as for the examples marked with circles
as color map.TheGLM modelwith linear features is seen to beunable
to capture the structure of the data, while the multi-layer network can
learn suitable features that improve the effectiveness of classification.
∗
4.5.3 Some Advanced Topics
We conclude this section by noting a few important aspects of the
ongoing research on deep neural networks.
A first issue concerns the theoretical understanding of the general-
ization propertiesofdeepneuralnetworks.Onthefaceofit,thesuccess
4.5. Discriminative Probabilistic Models: Beyond GLM 101
of deep neural networks appears to defy one of the the principles laid
out in Chapter 2, which will be formalized in the next chapter: Highly
over-parametrized models trained via ML suffer from overfitting and
hence do not generalize well. Recent results suggest that the use of
SGD, based on the gradient (4.37), may act a regularizer following an
MDL perspective. In fact, SGD favors the attainment of flat local max-
ima of the likelihood function. Flat maxima require a smaller number
of bits to be specified with respect to sharp maxima, since, in flat max-
ima, the parameter vector can be described with limited precision as
long as it remain within the flat region of the likelihood function [66,
79, 71] (see also [78] for a different perspective).
Another important aspect concerns the hardware implementation
of backprop. This is becoming extremely relevant given the practical
applications of deep neural networks for consumer’s devices. In fact,
a key aspect of backprop is the need to propagate the error, which
is measured at the last layer, to each synapse via the backward pass.
Thisisneededinordertoevaluatethegradient(4.37).Whileasoftware
implementation of this rule does not present any conceptual difficulty,
realizingthecomputationsin(4.36)inhardware,orevenonabiological
neural system, is faced with a number of issues.
A first problem is the non-locality of the update (4.37). An update
rule is local if it only uses information available at each neuron. In
contrast, as seen, rule (4.37) requires back-propagation through the
neural network. Another issue is the need for the backward pass to
usea different neuralpath with respectto the forward pass, given that,
unlikethebackwardpass,theforwardpassincludesalsonon-linearities.
A useful discussion of hardware implementation aspects can be found
in [12] (see also references therein).
To obviate at least some of these practical issues, a number of vari-
ations of the rule (4.37) have been proposed [12]. For instance, the
feedback alignment rule modifies (4.36b) by using fixed random ma-
trices in lieu of the current weight matrices Wl; while the broadcast
alignment rule writes the vectors δl as a linear function with fixed
random coefficients of the error (y t), hence removing the need for
−
back-propagation [129].
102 Classification
Furthermore, beside ML, there exist Bayesian learning algorithms
[53], including simplified approaches such as dropout [56, 64]. Signifi-
cant progress has also been made on applications such as image recog-
nition by leveraging the underlying structure, or geometry, of the data
[30].Asanimportantcaseinpoint,convolutional neural networks lever-
age the stationarity, locality and spatial invariance of image features
by limiting the receptive field of the neurons (i.e., by setting to zero
weights that connect to “distant” pixels) and by tying the weights of
neurons in the same layer.
Another recent development is the design of event-driven spiking
neural networks that can be implemented on neuromorphic computing
platforms with extremely low energy consumption (see, e.g., [84, 11]).
4.6 Generative Probabilistic Models
As discussed in Chapter 2, discriminative models do not attempt to
modelthedistributionof thedomain pointsx,learning onlythepredic-
tivedistributionp(t x).Incontrast,generativemodelsaimatmodelling
|
the joint distribution by specifying parametrized versions of the prior
distribution p(t), or p( ), and of the class-conditional probability dis-
k
C
tribution p(xt), or p(x ). As a result, generative models make more
k
| |C
assumptions about the data by considering also the distribution of the
covariates x. As such, generative models may suffer from bias when
the model is incorrectly selected. However, the capability to capture
the properties of the distribution of the explanatory variables x can im-
prove learningif theclass-conditional distribution p(xt)has significant
|
structure.
4.6.1 Model
Generative models for binary classification are typically defined as fol-
lows
t Bern(π) (4.38a)
∼
x t = t exponential(η ), (4.38b)
t
| ∼
4.6. Generative Probabilistic Models 103
where exponential(η) represents a distribution from the exponential
family with natural parameter vector η (see previous chapter). Accord-
ingly, the parameters of the model are θ = (π,η ,η ), where vectors
0 1
η represent the natural parameters of the class-dependent distribu-
t
tions. As we have seen in Chapter 2, we can also equivalently use
mean parameters to define the exponential family distributions. As
a result of this choice, the joint distribution for rv (x,t) is given as
p(x,t π,η ,η )= p(t π)p(xη ).
| 0 1 | | t
Inference. Given a new point x, in order to minimize the proba-
bility of error, the optimal prediction of the class under 0-1 loss can be
seen to satisfy the maximum a posteriori rule
πp(xη
1
) C1 1
p( x) = | ≷ . (4.39)
1
C | πp(xη )+(1 π)p(xη ) 2
|
1
− |
0 C0
4.6.2 Learning
We now focus on ML learning. The LL function can be written as
N N N
lnp( π,η ,η )= lnp(t π)+ lnp(x η )+ lnp(x η ).
0 1 n n 0 n 1
D| | | |
n=1 n=1: n=1:
X X X
tn=0 tn=1
(4.40)
Giventhedecomposition oftheLLin(4.40),wecanoptimizeover π,η
0
and η separately, obtaining the respective ML estimates. Note, how-
1
ever, that, while for π we can use the entire data set, the optimization
over parameters η and η can leverage smaller data sets that include
0 1
only the samples x with labels t = 0 or t = 1, respectively. As we
n n n
discussed in Chapter 2, ML estimates of exponential families merely
require moment matching, making these estimates generally easy to
obtain. We illustrate this point below with two important examples.
Quadratic Discriminant Analysis (QDA). In QDA, the class-
dependent distributions are Gaussian with class-dependent mean and
covariance:
t Bern(π) (4.41a)
∼
x t = k (µ ,Σ ). (4.41b)
k k
| ∼ N
104 Classification
By the general rules derived in Chapter 2 for the exponential family,
ML selects the moment matching estimates
N[1]
π = (4.42a)
ML
N
N
1
µ = x (4.42b)
k,ML n
N[k]
n=1:
X
tn=k
N
1
Σ = (x µ )(x µ )T. (4.42c)
k,ML n k n k
N[k] − −
n=1:
X
tn=k
The resulting predictive distribution for the label of a new sample is
then given by (4.39) by plugging in the estimates above as
π (xµ ,Σ )
ML 1,ML 1,ML
p( x) = N | .
1
C | π (xµ ,Σ )+(1 π ) (xµ ,Σ )
ML 1,ML 1,ML ML 0,ML 0,ML
N | − N |
(4.43)
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA).SettingΣ = Σfor both
k
classes k = 1,2 yields the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) model
[104]. Imposing that two generally distinct parameters, such as Σ and
1
Σ are equal is an example of parameter tying or sharing. By reducing
2
the number of parameters to be learned, parameter sharing can reduce
overfitting at the potential cost of introducing bias (see Chapter 2).
Under the assumption of conjugate priors, and of a priori indepen-
denceoftheparameters,MAPandBayesian approachescanbedirectly
obtained by following the derivations discussed in Chapter 2. We refer
to [23, 15, 104] for details.
4.6. Generative Probabilistic Models 105
-4 1
0.9
-3
0.8
-2
0.7
-1
0.6
0 0.5
0.4
1
0.3
2
0.2
3 0.1
4
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Figure 4.9: Probabilitythattheclasslabelisthesameasfortheexamplesmarked
with circles according to the output of thegenerative model QDA.The probability
isrepresentedbythecolormapillustrated bythebarontherightofthefigure.For
thisexample,itcanbeseenthatLDAfailstoseparatethetwoclasses(notshown).
Example 4.4. We continue the example in Sec. 4.5 by showing in Fig.
4.9 the probability (4.43) that the class label is the same as for the
examples marked with circles according to the output of QDA. Given
that the covariates have a structure that is well modelled by a mixture
ofGaussianswithdifferentcovariancematrices,QDAisseentoperform
well,arguablybetterthanthediscriminative modelsstudiedinSec.4.5.
It is important to note, however, that LDA would fail in this example.
Thisisbecauseamodelwithequalclass-dependentcovariancematrices,
as assumed by LDA, would entail a significant bias for this example.
∗
4.6.3 Multi-Class Classification
Asanexampleofagenerative probabilisticmodelwithmultipleclasses,
webrieflyconsiderthegeneralization ofQDAtoK 2classes.Extend-
≥
ing (4.41) to multiple classes, the model is described as
t Cat(π) (4.44a)
∼
x t = k (µ ,Σ ), (4.44b)
k k
| ∼ N
106 Classification
where t is encoded using one-hot encoding, so that the label of each
example is given by the vector t = [t ,...,t ]T. Following the
n 0n (K−1)n
discussion above, moment matching yields the ML estimates
N[k] N t
π = = n=1 kn (4.45a)
k,ML
N N
P
N
1
µ = t x (4.45b)
k,ML kn n
N[k]
n=1
X
N
1
Σ = t (x µ )(x µ )T. (4.45c)
k,ML kn n k n k
N[k] − −
n=1
X
∗
4.7 Boosting
In this last section, we return to the mixture models of the form (4.29)
anddiscussapopulartrainingapproachtoreduceoverfitting. We focus
on deterministic discriminative models with activations a (x,w˜ ), k =
k k
1,...,K, in which the mixture predictor is given as
K
a(x,w˜) = π a (x,w˜ ) (4.46)
k k k
k=1
X
with learnable parameters π and w˜ . The technique, known as
k k
{ } { }
boosting, trains one model a (x,w˜ ) at a time in a sequential fashion,
k k
from k = 1 to k = K, hence adding one predictor at each training
step k. As a result, boosting increases the capacity of the model in a
sequential manner, extending the sum in (4.46) over a growing number
of predictors. In this way, one starts by training a model with a large
bias, or approximation error; and progressively decreases the bias at
the cost of a potentially larger estimation error (see Chapter 2 and the
nextchapterforfurtherdiscussiononbiasandestimation error).Aswe
will discuss below, each model is trained by solving an ERM problem
inwhichthecontribution ofatrainingexampleisweighted bytheerror
rate of the previously trained models.
To elaborate, boosting – more specifically the AdaBoost scheme –
can be described as solving an ERM problem with the exponential loss
function ℓ(t,a(x,w˜)) = exp( t a(x,w˜)), which is plotted in Fig. 4.4.
− ·
4.8. Summary 107
When training the kth model, the outputs a (x,w˜ ),...,a (x,w˜ )
1 1 k−1 k−1
of the previously trained models, as well as their weights π ,...,π ,
1 k−1
are kept fixed. Excluding the models k+1,...,K, the training loss can
be written as
N
α(k)exp( π t a (x ,w˜ )), (4.47)
n − k n · k n k
n=1
X
with the weights
k−1
α(k) = exp t π a (x ,w˜ ) . (4.48)
n − n · j j n j 
j=1
X
 
An important point is that the weights (4.48) are larger for training
samples n with smaller functional margin under the mixture model
k−1π a (x ,w˜ ). Therefore, when training the kth model, we give
j=1 j j n j
more importance to examples that fare worse in terms of classification
P
margins under the current mixture model. Note that, at each training
step k, one trains a simple model, which has the added advantage
of reducing the computational complexity as compared to the direct
learning of thefull training model.We refer to [23, Ch.14][133, Ch.10]
for further details.
4.8 Summary
This chapter has provided a brief review of the key supervised learning
problem of classification. Following the taxonomy put forth in Chapter
2, we have divided learning algorithms according to the type of models
usedtorelate explanatory variables andlabels.Specifically,wehavede-
scribeddeterministicdiscriminativemodels,bothlinear andnon-linear,
covering the perceptron algorithm, SVM, and backprop for multi-layer
neural networks; probabilistic discriminative models, concentrating on
GLM; and probabilistic generative models, including QDA and LDA.
We have also introduced the more advanced topics of mixture models
and boosting. We finally mention that supervised learning, in the form
of classification and regression, can also be used as a building block for
the task of sequential decision processing via imitation learning (see,
e.g., [88]).
108 Classification
While this chapter has focused on algorithmic aspects, the next
chapter discusses a well-established theoretical framework in which to
study the performance of learning for classification.
∗
Appendix A: More on SGD
In this appendix, we provide some discussion on the convergence of
SGD and on more advanced optimization techniques.
Convergence
To briefly discuss the convergence properties of SGD, consider first for
reference the conventional gradient descent algorithms, which corre-
sponds to choosing the entire training set, i.e., = 1,...,N , at each
S { }
iteration. If the function to be optimized is strictly convex5, as for the
quadratic loss, the algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the (unique)
minimum even with a fixed learning rate γ(i) = γ, as long as the lat-
ter is no larger than the inverse of the maximum curvature of the loss
function L, i.e., γ 1/L. For twice-differentiable loss functions, the
≤
maximum curvature L can be evaluated as the maximum eigenvalue
of the Hessian matrix. Functions with finite curvature L are known
as Lipschitz smooth. For these functions, the convergence is geometric,
and hence the number of iterations needed to obtain an error on the
optimal solution equal to ǫ scales as ln(1/ǫ) (see, e.g., [152, Chapter
8][33, 72]).
Weturnnow totheproperSGDalgorithm operatingwithasmaller
mini-batchsizeS.Ifthelearningratescheduleisselectedsoastosatisfy
the Robbins–Monro conditions
∞ ∞
γ(i) = and (γ(i))2 < , (4.49)
∞ ∞
i=1 i=1
X X
the SGD algorithm is known to converge to the optimal solution of
problem (4.9) in the case of strictly convex functions and to station-
ary points for non-convex functions with bounded curvature (see [152,
5If the function is twice differentiable, strict convexity is equivalent to the re-
quirement that all theeigenvalues of theHessian matrix are strictly positive.
4.8. Summary 109
Chapter 8] for details). Learning rate schedules that satisfy (4.49) in-
cludeγ(i) =1/i.Theintuitivereasonfortheuseofdiminishinglearning
rates is the need to limit the impact of the “noise” associated with the
finite-sample estimate of the gradient [22]. The proof of convergence
leverages the unbiasedness of the estimate of the gradient obtained by
SGD.
In practice, a larger mini-batch size S decreases the variance of the
estimate of the gradient, hence improving the accuracy when close to a
stationary point. However, choosing a smaller S can improve the speed
of convergence when the current solution is far from the optimum [152,
Chapter 8][22]. A smaller mini-batch size S is also known to improve
thegeneralizationperformanceoflearningalgorithmsbyavoidingsharp
extremal points of the training loss function [66, 79, 71] (see also Sec.
4.5).Furthermore,as analternative todecreasingthestep size, onecan
also increase the size of the mini-batch along the iterations of the SGD
algorithm [136].
Variations and Generalizations
Many variations of the discussed basic SGD algorithm have been pro-
posedandareroutinelyused.Generalprinciplesmotivatingthesesched-
ulevariantsinclude[56,Chapter8]:(i)momentum,orheavy-ball, mem-
ory:correctthedirectionsuggestedbythestochasticgradientbyconsid-
eringthe “momentum” acquired duringthe last update;(ii) adaptivity:
use a different learning rate for different parameters depending on an
estimate of the curvature of the loss function with respect to each pa-
rameter; (iii) control variates: in order to reduce the variance of the
SGD updates, add control variates that do not affect the unbiased-
ness of the stochastic gradient and are negatively correlated with the
stochastic gradient; and (iv) second-order updates: include information
about the curvature of the cost or objective function in the parameter
update.
As detailed in [56, Chapter 8][76, 43], to which we refer for further
discussions, schemes in the first category include Nesterov momentum;
inthesecondcategory, wefindAdaGrad,RMSpropandAdam;andthe
third encompasses SVRG and SAGA. Finally, the fourth features New-
110 Classification
ton methods, which require calculation of the Hessian to evaluate the
local curvature of the objective, and approximated Newton methods,
which leverage an estimate of the Hessian. The practical and theoret-
ical implications of the use of these methods is still under discussion
[157].
Related to second-order methods is the natural gradient approach,
which applies most naturally to probabilistic models in which the func-
tion to be optimized is a LL [5]. The conventional gradient method
updates the parameters by moving in the direction that minimizes the
cost function under a constraint on the norm of the update vector in
theparameterspace.Apotentiallyproblematicaspectofthismethodis
that the Euclidean distance θ′ θ′′ 2 between two parameter vectors
|| − ||
θ′ and θ′′,e.g., two mean parameters in a modelwithin the exponential
family, does not provide a direct measure of the distance of the two
corresponding distributions in terms of relevant metrics such as the
KL divergence. The natural gradient method addresses this issue by
measuringthesizeof theupdatedirectly interms of theKL divergence
between distributions.This modifiesthe updateby pre-multiplying the
gradient with the inverse of the Fisher information matrix [5].
The discussion above focuses on the common case of differentiable
costfunctions.ERMproblemstypicallyincludepossiblynon-differentiable
regularization terms. To tackle these problems, techniques such as the
subgradient method and proximal gradient can be used in lieu of SGD
[22]. Other important aspects of optimization schemes include paral-
lelism and non-convexity (see, e.g., [130, 141, 44, 161]). Alternatives
to gradient methods that do not require differentiability include evolu-
tionary schemes [128].
∗
Appendix B: Kernel Methods
In this section, we provide a brief introduction to kernel methods. This
section requires some background in Lagrange duality.
We start by revisiting the problem (4.16) solved by SVM. Using
Lagrange duality, the optimization (4.16) can be solved in the dual do-
main, that is, by optimizing over the dual variables or the Lagrange
multipliers. Referring for details to [23, Chapter 7], the resulting prob-
4.8. Summary 111
lem turns out to be quadratic and convex. Importantly, the resulting
optimal activation can be expressed as
N
a(x,w˜)= α t k(x,x ), (4.50)
n n n
n=1
X
whereα aretheoptimaldualvariables,andwehavedefinedthekernel
n
function
k(x,y) = φ(x)Tφ(y), (4.51)
wherex and y are two argument vectors. Thekernel function measures
the correlation – informally, the similarity – between the two inputvec-
torsxandy.Theactivation(4.50)hashenceanintuitiveinterpretation:
The decision about the label of an example x depends on the support
vectors x , which have α > 0, that are the most similar to x. We note
n n
that equation (4.50) can also bejustified usingtherepresenter theorem
in [133, Chapter 16], which shows that the optimal weight vector must
be a linear combination of the feature vectors φ(x ) N .
{ n }n=1
Working in the dual domain can have computational advantages
whenthe numberof the primalvariables, here the size D′ of the weight
vector w˜, is larger than the number N of dual variables. While this
seems a prior unlikely to happen in practice, it turns out that this is
not the case. The key idea is that one can use (4.50) with any other
kernel function, not necessarily one explicitly defined by a feature func-
tion φ(). A kernel function is any symmetric function measuring the
·
correlation oftwodatapoints,possiblyinaninfinite-dimensionalspace.
This is known as the kernel trick.
As a first example, the polynomial kernel
k(x,y) = (γxTy+r)L, (4.52)
wherer > 0,correspondstoacorrelationφ(x)Tφ(y)inahigh-dimensional
space D′. For instance, with L = 2 and D = 1, we have D′ = 6 and
T
the feature vector φ(x) = 1, √2x , √2x , x2x2, √2x x [104]. As
1 2 1 2 1 2
another, more extreme, exahmple, the conventional Gaussiain kernel
k(x,y) =
e−rkx−yk2
(4.53)
corresponds to an inner product in an infinite dimensional space [104].
An extensive discussion on kernel methods can be found in [104].
112 Classification
Beforeleaving thesubjectof kernelmethods,itisworthnotingthat
an important class of methods including k Nearest Neighbor (k-NN),
−
uses kernels that are data-dependent. k-NN is also an example of non-
parametric learning rules.Incontrasttotheotherschemesstudiedhere,
itdoesnotrelyonaparametricmodelofthe(probabilistic)relationship
betweeninputandoutput.Instead,k-NNleveragestheassumptionthat
the labels of nearby points x should be similar [81].
5
∗
Statistical Learning Theory
Statisticallearningtheoryprovidesawell-established theoreticalframe-
workinwhichtostudythetrade-offbetween thenumberN ofavailable
data points and the generalization performance of a trained machine.
The approach formalizes the notions of model capacity, estimation er-
ror (or generalization gap), and bias that underlie many of the design
choices requiredbysupervisedlearning,aswehaveseenintheprevious
chapters. This chapter is of mathematical nature, and it departs from
the algorithmic focus of the text so far. While it may be skipped at a
first reading, the chapter sheds light on the key empirical observations
made in the previous chapters relative to learning in a frequentist set-
up. It does so by covering the theoretical underpinnings of supervised
learning within the classical framework of statistical learning theory.
To this end, the chapter contains a number of formal statements with
proofs. The proofs have been carefully selected in order to highlight
and clarify the key theoretical ideas. This chapter follows mostly the
treatment in [133].
113
114 Statistical Learning Theory∗
5.1 A Formal Framework for Supervised Learning
In this chapter, we concentrate on discriminative deterministic models
for binary classification, as it is typically done in statistical learning
theory. We also focus on the standard 0-1 loss ℓ(t,tˆ) = 1(tˆ = t), for
6
which the generalization loss is theprobability of error. Thelabels t for
the two classes take values in the set 0,1 (cf. (4.4)).
{ }
Thelearningproblemisformalizedasfollows.Assumethatamodel,
or hypothesis class, has been selected. This set contains a, possibly
H
uncountable, number of predictors tˆthat map each point x in the do-
main space to a label tˆ(x) in 0,1 . We would like to choose a specific
{ }
hypothesis, or predictor, tˆ that minimize the generalization error
∈ H
(cf. (2.2))
L (tˆ) = E [ℓ(t,tˆ(x))]. (5.1)
p (x,t)∼pxt
Solving this inference problem would yield an optimal model within
class as
H
tˆ∗ argminL (tˆ). (5.2)
H ∈ tˆ∈H p
The notation in (5.2) emphasizes that there may be multiple optimal
hypotheses returned by the minimization of the generalization error
L (tˆ). Nevertheless, to fix the ideas, it is useful to think of the case in
p
which there is a unique optimal hypothesis. This is, for instance, the
case when the loss function is strictly convex. Obtaining the optimal
predictor(5.2)requiresknowledgeofthetruedistributionp(x,t),which
is not available.
Example 5.1. For the linear (deterministic) methods studied in Chap-
ter 4, the model is defined as
= t (x) = sign(wTx+w ) (5.3)
w˜ 0
H { }
with w˜ = [wT w ]T, and similarly for the feature-based version. Identi-
0
fying a hypothesis within this class requires the selection of the weight
vector w˜ RD+1.
∈
In lieu of the true distribution p(x,t), what is available is an i.i.d.
training set
= (x ,t ) N p(x,t) (5.4)
D { n n }n=1 i.∼i.d.
5.1. A Formal Framework for Supervised Learning 115
distributed according to p(x,t). A learning algorithm, such as ERM,
takes the training set as input and returns a predictor tˆ as
D
D ∈ H
output. We would like the predictive model tˆ to yield a gen-
D
∈ H
eralization error L (tˆ ) that is as close as possible to the minimum
p D
generalization loss L (tˆ∗ ). Note that the selected model tˆ is random
p H D
due to randomness of the data set .
D
In this regard, we recall that the ERM learning rule chooses a hy-
pothesis tˆERM by following the criterion tˆERM = argmin L (tˆ),
D ∈ H D tˆ∈H D
where the empirical risk is
N
1
L (tˆ) = ℓ(t ,tˆ(x ))). (5.5)
D n n
N
n=1
X
The notation in (5.5) emphasizes the randomness of the training set
= (x ,t ) N .
D { n n }n=1
Since the distribution p(x,t) is unknown, a learning rule tˆ , such
D
as ERM,can only minimize the generalization loss L (tˆ) approximately
p
based on the observation of the data . Furthermore, this approxi-
D
mation can only be guaranteed at some probability level due to the
randomness of the data set . This is illustrated in Fig. 5.1, in which
D
we have represented a high-probability interval for rv L (tˆ ) on the
p D
horizontal axis. We would like the approximation to be accurate for all
values of L (tˆ ) within this interval.
p D
But there is more: the probabilistic guarantee in terms of accuracy
cannot dependon the specific distribution p(x,t), butit should instead
be universal with respect to all distributions p(x,t). In summary, the
best one can hope for is to have a learning rule tˆ that is Probably
D
Approximately Correct (PAC).
In order to formalize this notion, we introduce the following defini-
tion.
Definition 5.1. A learning rule tˆ is (N,ǫ,δ) PAC if, when working
D
on data sets of N examples, it satisfies the inequality
D
L (tˆ ) L (tˆ∗ )+ǫ (5.6)
p D ≤ p H
with probability no smaller than 1 δ, that is,
−
Pr [L (tˆ ) L (tˆ∗ )+ǫ] 1 δ, (5.7)
D ∼ pxt p D ≤ p H ≥ −
i.i.d.
116 Statistical Learning Theory∗
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0 2 4 6 8 10
Figure 5.1: A learning algorithm tˆ outputs a hypothesis that depends on the
D
random training set D. It hence takes values in a given interval (the box on the
horizontalaxis)with somelargeprobability1−δ.Theaccuracy levelǫismeasured
by the difference with respect to optimal generalization loss L (tˆ∗) for the worst-
p H
case tˆ in thehigh-probability interval.
D
for any true distribution p(x,t).
In (5.6), we have defined ǫ as the accuracy parameter and δ as the
confidence parameter. The accuracy is also known as estimation error
or generalization gap according to the definition given in Sec. 2.3.3. In
words, the (N,ǫ,δ) PAC condition (5.6) requires that the learning rule
tˆ operating over N data points is ǫ accurate with probability 1 δ
D
− −
for any distribution p(x,t).
The key question is: Given a model , how large should N be in
H
order to ensure the existence of an (N,ǫ,δ) PAC learning scheme tˆ
D
for given accuracy and confidence levels (ǫ,δ)? At a high level, we know
that a large model order implies the need for a larger N in order to
avoid overfitting. More precisely, we expect to observe the behavior
illustrated in Fig. 5.2: As N increases, (i) the interval of values taken
by the generalization loss L (tˆ ) with probability nosmaller than 1 δ
p D
−
shrinks; and (ii) the generalization loss L (tˆ ) tends to the minimum
p D
generalization loss L (tˆ∗ ), and hence the estimation error vanishes. As
p H
5.1. A Formal Framework for Supervised Learning 117
illustratedinthenextexample,thisexpectedbehaviorisaconsequence
of the law of large numbers, since a larger N allows an increasingly
accurate estimation of the true general loss.
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Figure 5.2: High-probability interval (dashed arrow) for the generalization error
L (tˆ ) versusthe numberN of data points for a model H.
p D
Example 5.2. Consider the problem of binary classification using the
model of threshold functions, namely
0, if x < θ
= tˆ (x) = = 1(x θ) , (5.8)
θ
H  1, if x θ ≥ 
  ≥ 
wherexis a real number(D= 1). Note that the modelis parametrized
by the threshold θ. Make the realizability assumption that the true dis-
tribution is within the hypothesis allowed by the model, i.e., p(x,t) =
p(x)1(t = tˆ (x))andhencetheoptimalhypothesisistˆ∗ = tˆ ,or,equiva-
0 H 0
lently,theoptimalthresholdisθ∗ = 0.Assumingauniformdistribution
p(x)= (x 0.5,0.5) in the interval [ 0.5,0.5] for the domain points,
U |− −
Fig. 5.3 shows the generalization error Pr[tˆ (x) = t (x)] = θ , as well
θ 0
6 | |
as the training loss L (tˆ ) for the training set shown on the horizontal
D θ
axis, for two values of N. Note that the training loss L (tˆ ) is simply
D θ
118 Statistical Learning Theory∗
the fraction of training examples that are correctly classified. It is ob-
servedthat,asN increases,thetrainingloss,orempiricalrisk,becomes
anincreasingly reliableestimate of thegeneralization loss uniformlyfor
all hypotheses, parameterized by θ, in the model.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.5 0 0.5
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.5 0 0.5
Figure5.3:Generalizationandtraininglossesforascalarthresholdclassifiermodel.
As suggested by the example, if N is large enough, the empirical
risk, or training loss, L (tˆ) approximates increasingly well (with high
D
probability) the generalization loss L (tˆ) for any fixed hypothesis in
p
tˆ bythelawoflargenumbers.Itwouldthenseemthattheproblem
∈ H
is solved: Since L (tˆ) L (tˆ) for any tˆ, the ERM solution tˆERM,
D ≃ p D
which minimizes the training loss L (tˆ), should also approximately
D
minimize the generalization loss L (tˆ), and hence we have tˆERM tˆ∗ .
p D ≃ H
However, this argument is incorrect. In fact, we need the training loss
L (tˆ) to be an accurate approximation of the generalization loss L (tˆ)
D p
uniformly for all hypotheses in tˆ in order to ensure the condition
∈ H
tˆERM tˆ∗ . As we will see in the rest of this chapter, guaranteeing
D ≃ H
this condition requires to observe a number of samples N that grows
with the “capacity” of the model , that is, roughly, with the number
H
of parameters defining the hypotheses in . Moreover, some models
H
5.2. PAC Learnability and Sample Complexity 119
turn out to be impossible to learn – in the sense of PAC learnability
formalized below – no matter how large N is.
5.2 PAC Learnability and Sample Complexity
In order to formally address the key question posed above regarding
the learnability of a model , we make the following definitions. As
H
mentioned,forsimplicity,weconsiderbinaryclassificationunderthe0-1
loss,although theanalysis can begeneralized undersuitable conditions
[133].
Definition 5.2. A hypothesis class is PAC learnable if, for any ǫ,δ
H ∈
(0,1), thereexistan(N,ǫ,δ) PAClearningruleaslongastheinequality
N N (ǫ,δ) is satisfied for some function N (ǫ,δ) < .
H H
≥ ∞
In words, a hypothesis class is PAC learnable if, as long as enough
data is collected, a learning algorithm can be found that obtains any
desiredlevelofaccuracyandconfidence.Anillustrationofthethreshold
N (ǫ,δ) can be found in Fig. 5.2. A less strong definition of PAC
H
learnability requires (5.7) to hold only for all true distributions p(x,t)
that can be written as
p(x,t) = p(x)1(t = tˆ(x)) (5.9)
for some marginal distribution p(x) and for some hypothesis tˆ(x) .
∈ H
The condition (5.9) is known as the realizability assumption, which im-
plies that the data is generated from some mechanism that is included
in the hypothesis class. Note that realizability implies the linear sepa-
rability of any data set drawn from the true distribution for the class
of linear predictors (see Chapter 4).
Afirstimportant,andperhapssurprising,observationisthatnotall
modelsarePAC learnable. As anextreme exampleof this phenomenon,
consider the class of all functions from RD to 0,1 . By the no
H { }
free lunch theorem, this class is not PAC learnable. In fact, given any
amount of data, we can always find a distribution p(x,t) under which
the PAC condition is not satisfied. Intuitively, even in the realizable
case, knowing the correct predictor tˆ(x) in (5.9) for any number of
120 Statistical Learning Theory∗
x RD yields no information on the value of tˆ(x) for other values of x.
∈
As another, less obvious, example the class
= h (x) = 1(sin(wx) > 0) (5.10)
w
H { }
is not PAC learnable despite being parameterized by a single scalar
[133].
Definition 5.3. Thesamplecomplexity N∗(ǫ,δ) ofmodel isthemin-
H H
imal value of N (ǫ,δ) that satisfies the requirements of PAC learning
H
for .
H
We will see next that the sample complexity depends on the ca-
pacity of the model . Note that the sample complexity of the two
H
examples above is infinite since they are not PAC learnable. We also
remark that PAC learnability may be alternatively defined under the
additional conditions on the scaling of N∗(ǫ,δ) as a function of ǫ and
H
δ, as well as on the computational complexity of the learning rule. We
will not consider these more refined definitions here, and we refer the
reader to [51, 133] for discussion.
5.3 PAC Learnability for Finite Hypothesis Classes
In this section, we consider models with a finite number of hypothe-
ses. The main result is summarized in the following theorem, which is
proved below in Sec. 5.3.1.
Theorem5.1. Afinitehypothesisclass isPAClearnablewithsample
H
complexity satisfying the inequality
2ln +2ln(2/δ)
N∗(ǫ,δ) |H| , NERM(ǫ,δ). (5.11)
H ≤ & ǫ2 ' H
Moreover, the ERM algorithm achieves the upper bound NERM(ǫ,δ).
H
TheprevioustheoremshowsthatallfiniteclassesarePAClearnable.
Furthermore, for all finite classes, ERM is a PAC learning rule for any
desired levels of accuracy and confidence (ǫ,δ), as long as N is larger
than the threshold NERM(ǫ,δ). This threshold, which we will refer to
H
5.3. PAC Learnability for Finite Hypothesis Classes 121
as the ERM sample complexity for class , depends on the capacity
H
of the hypothesis class, defined as ln (nats) or log (bits). This
2
|H| |H|
is the number of bits required to index the hypotheses in . It is also
H
interesting to note that increasing the accuracy, i.e., decreasing ǫ is
more demanding than increasing the confidence, that is, decreasing δ,
in terms of sample complexity.
Another way to understand the result (5.11) is that, with N data
points, we can achieve the estimation error
2ln(2 /δ)
ǫ = |H| , (5.12)
s N
with probability 1 δ, by using ERM. As a result, with N data points,
−
we can upper bound the generalization loss of ERM as
2ln /δ
L (tˆERM) L (tˆ∗ )+ |H| (5.13)
p D ≤ p H s N
with probability 1 δ. In words, ERM achieves the optimal generaliza-
−
tion loss with an estimation error that scales with square root of the
model capacity and with the inverse square root of N.
As another important note, under the realizability assumption, the
theorem can be modified to yield the smaller upper bound [133]
ln +ln(1/δ)
N∗(ǫ,δ) |H| , NERM(ǫ,δ), (5.14)
H ≤ & ǫ ' H
which is also achievable by ERM.
What does the theorem say about infinitemodels such as the linear
classifier (5.3)? One approach is to learn a “quantized” version of ,
H
say ,inwhicheach weight isrepresentedbybbitsor,equivalently, as
b
H
one of 2b pre-determined quantization levels. As a result, the number
of hypotheses in the hypothesis class is = (2b)D+1, and the
H |H|
capacity of the hypothesis class is log = (D+1)b (bits) or ln =
|H| |H|
b(D + 1)ln2 (nats). It follows that, using (5.3), we obtain the ERM
sample complexity
2b(D+1)ln2+2ln(2/δ)
NERM(ǫ,δ) = . (5.15)
H
&
ǫ2
'
122 Statistical Learning Theory∗
It is observed that the ERM sample complexity scales proportionally
to the number of parameters D+1 and to the resolution b. Therefore,
obtaining an arbitrary precision by selecting larger values of b yields
a sample complexity that grows unbounded. We will see below how to
correct this result by introducing a more advanced theory of general-
ization through the concept of Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension.
5.3.1 Proof of Theorem 5.1
The proof of Theorem 5.1 reveals the role played by the training loss
L (tˆ) in approximating the generalization loss L (tˆ) uniformly for all
D p
hypotheses tˆ . We start with the following key lemma.
∈ H
Lemma 5.2. For any N NERM(ǫ,δ), we have
≥ H
ǫ
Pr L (tˆ) L (tˆ) for all tˆ 1 δ. (5.16)
D ∼ p(x,t) p D
| − | ≤ 2 ∈ H ≥ −
i.i.d. (cid:20) (cid:21)
Reflecting the observation made above around Fig. 5.3, the lemma
saysthatthetraininglossL (tˆ)isauniformlyaccurate approximation,
D
with accuracy level ǫ/2, of the generalization loss, as long as N
≥
NERM(ǫ,δ).
H
Assume now that the lemma is true – a proof will be given below.
Using the lemma, Theorem 5.1 follows immediately from the inequali-
ties
ǫ ǫ
L (tˆERM) L (tˆERM)+ L (tˆ∗)+ (5.17)
p D ≤ D D 2 ≤ D 2
ǫ ǫ
L (tˆ∗)+ + =L (tˆ∗)+ǫ, (5.18)
p p
≤ 2 2
where the first inequality follows from the lemma; the second from the
definition of ERM; and the third by another application of the lemma.
We hence only need to prove the Lemma in order to conclude the
proof. To proceed, we will use Hoeffding’s inequality, which says the
following (see, e.g., [133]). For i.i.d. rvs u ,u , ,u p(u) such
1 2 M
··· ∼
that E[u ] = µ and Pr[a u b] = 1, we have the large deviation
i i
≤ ≤
inequality
1 M 2Mǫ2
Pr u µ > ǫ 2exp . (5.19)
"(cid:12)M m − (cid:12) # ≤ −(b a)2 !
(cid:12) m X =1 (cid:12) −
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
5.3. PAC Learnability for Finite Hypothesis Classes 123
We can now write the following sequence of equalities and inequalities,
which prove the lemma and hence conclude the proof:
ǫ
Pr tˆ : L (tˆ) L (tˆ) >
D ∼ p(x,t) p D
∃ ∈ H | − | 2
i.i.d. (cid:20) (cid:21)
ǫ
=Pr L (tˆ) L (tˆ) >
D ∼ p(x,t) p D
 | − | 2 
i.i.d. tˆ [∈H(cid:26) (cid:27)
 ǫ 
Pr L (tˆ) L (tˆ) >
D ∼ p(x,t) p D
≤ | − | 2
tˆ X∈H i.i.d. (cid:20) (cid:21)
Nǫ2
2 exp
≤ − 2 !
tˆ X∈H
Nǫ2
=2 exp δ,
|H| − 2 ! ≤
where the first inequality follows by the union bound; the second by
Hoeffding’s inequality; and the third can be verified to be true as long
as the inequality N NERM(ǫ,δ) is satisfied.
≥ H
∗
5.3.2 Structural Risk Minimization
The result proved above is useful also to introduce the Structural Risk
Minimization (SRM) learning approach. SRM is a method for joint
model selection and hypothesis learning that is based on the minimiza-
tion of an upper bound on the generalization loss. In principle, the ap-
proach avoids the useof validation, and has deep theoretical properties
in terms of generalization [133]. In practical applications, the approach
is rarely used, and validation is often preferable. It is nevertheless con-
ceptually and theoretically a cornerstone of statistical learning theory.
Toelaborate,assumethatwehaveanestedsetofhypothesisclasses
... . For instance, the nested model may corre-
H
1
⊆ H
2
⊆ ⊆ H
Mmax
spond to linear classifiers with increasing orders M 1,2,...,M .
max
∈ { }
From Lemma 5.2, we can obtain the following bound
ln(2 /δ)
L (tˆ) L (tˆ)+ |H M | (5.20)
p D
≤ s 2N
124 Statistical Learning Theory∗
for all tˆ , with probability 1 δ. SRM minimizes this upper
M
∈ H −
bound, which is a pessimistic estimate of the generalization loss, over
both the choice of the model M and the hypothesis tˆ . We note
M
∈ H
the similarity of this approach with the simplified MDL criterion based
on two-part codes covered in Chapter 2.
5.4 VC Dimension and Fundamental Theorem of PAC Learning
We have seen that finite classes are PAC learnable with sample com-
plexityproportionaltothemodelcapacity ln byusingERM.Inthis
|H|
section, we address the following questions: Is NERM(ǫ,δ) the smallest
H
sample complexity? How can we define the capacity of infinite hypoth-
esis classes? We have discussed at the end of Sec. 5.3 that the answer
to the latter question cannot be found by extrapolating from results
obtained when considering finite hypothesis classes. In contrast, will
see here that the answers to both of these questions rely on the con-
cept of VC dimension, which serves as a more fundamental definition
of capacity of a model. The VC dimension is defined next.
Definition 5.4. A hypothesis class is said to shatter a set of domain
H
points = x V if, no matter how the corresponding labels t
X { n }n=1 { n ∈
0,1 V are selected, there exists a hypothesis tˆ that ensures
{ }}n=1 ∈ H
tˆ(x ) =t for all n = 1,...,V.
n n
Definition 5.5. The VC dimension VCdim( ) of the model is the
H H
size of the largest set that is shattered by .
X H
Basedonthedefinitionsabove,toprovethatamodelhasVCdim( )=
H
V, we need to carry out the following two steps:
Step 1) Demonstrate the existence of a set with = V that
X |X|
is shattered by ; and
H
Step 2) Prove that no set of dimension V + 1 exists that is
X
shattered by .
H
The second step is typically seen to be more difficult, as illustrated
by the following examples.
Example 5.3. The threshold function model (5.8) has VCdim( )= 1,
H
since there is clearly a set of one sample (V = 1) that can be shat-
X
5.4. VC Dimension and Fundamental Theorem of PAC Learning 125
tered (Step 1); but there are no sets of V = 2 that can be shattered
(Step 2). In fact, for any set = (x ,x ) of two points with x x ,
1 2 1 2
X ≤
the label assignment (t ,t ) = (1,0) cannot be realized by any choice
1 2
of the threshold θ, which is the only parameter in the model.
Example 5.4. The model = tˆ (x) = 1(a x b) , which assigns
a,b
H { ≤ ≤ }
the label t = 1 within an interval [a,b] and the label t = 0 outside it,
has VCdim( )= 2. In fact, any set of V = 2 points can be shattered
H
– and hence there also exists one such set (Step 1); while there are no
sets of V = 3 points that can be shattered (Step 2). For Step 2, note
X
that,for any set = (x ,x ,x )of threepointswith x x x ,the
1 2 3 1 2 3
X ≤ ≤
label assignment (t ,t ,t ) = (1,0,1) cannot be realized by any choice
1 2 3
of the two free parameters (a,b).
Example5.5. Themodel = tˆ (x) = 1(a x a and b
H {
a1,a2,b1,b2 1
≤
1
≤
2 1
≤
x b ) , which assigns the label t = 1 within an axis-aligned rectan-
2 2
≤ }
gle defined by parameters a ,a ,b and b has VCdim( )= 4, as it can
1 2 1 2
H
be proved by using arguments similar to the previous examples.
Example 5.6. The linear classifier (5.3) has VCdim( )= D+1 [133].
H
The example above suggests that the VC dimension of a set often
coincides with the number of degrees of freedom, or free parameters, in
the model. However, this is not necessarily the case.
Example 5.7. Model (5.10), while having a single parameter, has an
infinite VC dimension [133].
Wealsonotethat,forfiniteclasses,wehavetheinequalityVCdim( )
H ≤
log , since hypotheses can create at most different label con-
|H| |H| |H|
figurations.Thenexttheorem,whoseimportanceisattested by its title
offundamental theorem of PAC learning,providesananswertothetwo
questions posed at the beginning of this section.
Theorem 5.3. A model with finite VCdim( )= d < is PAC
H H ∞
learnable with sample complexity
d+ln(1/δ) d+ln(1/δ)
C N∗(ǫ,δ) C (5.21)
1 ǫ2 ≤ H ≤ 2 ǫ2
forsomeconstantsC andC .Moreover,theERMlearningruleachieves
1 2
the upper bound.
126 Statistical Learning Theory∗
The theorem shows that the sample complexity is proportional to
(VCdim( )+ln(1/δ))/ǫ2. This reveals that VCdim( ) can be consid-
H H
ered as the correct definition of capacity for a hypothesis class , irre-
H
spective of whether the class is finite or not: As VCdim( ) increases,
H
the number of required data points for PAC learning increases propor-
tionally to it. Furthermore, the theorem demonstrates that, if learning
is possible for a given model , then ERM allows us to learn with
H
close-to-optimal sample complexity.
Foraproofofthisresultandforextensions,werefertotheextensive
treatment in [133]. We mention here the important extension of the
theory of generalization to convex learning problems – i.e., to problems
with convex parameter set and a convex loss function. Rather than
depending on the model complexity as the theory developed so far,
generalization in this class of problems hinges on the stability of the
learning algorithms. Stability is the property that small changes in the
inputdonotaffectmuchtheoutputofthelearningalgorithm–anotion
related to that of differential privacy [119].We also point to therelated
notion of capacity of a perceptron introduced in [94].
5.5 Summary
This chapter has described the classical PAC framework for the anal-
ysis of the generalization performance of supervised learning for clas-
sification. We have seen that the concept of VC dimension defines the
capacity of the model, and, through it, the number of samples needed
to learn the model with a given accuracy and confidence, or sample
complexity. In the next chapter, we move from supervised learning to
unsupervised learning problems.
∗
Appendix: Minimax Redundancy and Model Capacity
Inthisappendix,wedescribeanalternativedefinitionofmodelcapacity
thatisdirectlyrelatedtotheconventionalnotionofShannon’scapacity
ofanoisychannel[38].AsforSec.2.5,somebackgroundininformation
theory may be needed to fully appreciate the content of this appendix.
5.5. Summary 127
To elaborate, consider a probabilistic model defined as the set
H
of all pmfs p(xθ) parametrized by θ in a given set. With some abuse
|
of notation, we take to be also the domain of parameter θ. To fix
H
the ideas, assume that x takes values over a finite alphabet. We know
from Sec. 2.5, that a distribution q(x) is associated with a lossless
compression scheme that requires around logq(x) bits to describe a
−
value x. Furthermore, if we were informed about the true parameter θ,
the minimum average coding length would be the entropy H(p(xθ)),
|
which requires setting q(x) = p(xθ) (see Appendix A).
|
Assume now that we only know that the parameter θ lies in set
, and hence the true distribution p(xθ) is not known. In this case,
H |
we cannot select the true parameter distribution, and we need instead
to choose a generally different distribution q(x) to define a compres-
sion scheme. With a given distribution q(x), the average coding length
is given by p(xθ)logq(x). Therefore, the choice of a generally
− x |
incorrect distribution q(x) entails a redundancy of
P
∆R(q(x),θ) = p(xθ)logq(x) H(p(xθ)) 0 (5.22)
− | − | ≥
x
X
bits.
The redundancy ∆R(q(x),θ) in (5.22) depends on the true value of
θ.Since the latter is not known, this quantity cannot becomputed. We
can instead obtain a computable metric by maximizing over all values
of θ , which yields the worst-case redundancy
∈ H
∆R(q(x), ) = max∆R(q(x),θ). (5.23)
H θ∈H
This quantity can be minimized over q(x) yielding the so-called mini-
max redundancy:
∆R( )= min∆R(q(x), ) (5.24)
H q(x) H
= min max p(xθ)logq(x) H(p(xθ)) (5.25)
q(x) θ − | − |
x
X
p(xθ)
= min max p(xθ)log | . (5.26)
q(x) θ | q(x)
x
X
Theminimaxredundancycanbetaken asameasureofthecapacity
of model ,since aricher modeltends toyield a larger ∆R( ).In fact,
H H
128 Statistical Learning Theory∗
for a richer model, it is more difficult to find a representative distribu-
tion q(x) that yields an average coding length close to the minimum
H(p(xθ)) for all values of θ.
|
It turns out that the minimax redundancy equals the capacity
C(p(xθ))ofthechannelp(xθ),whichisdefinedasC(p(xθ))= max I(x;θ)
p(θ)
| | |
[38]. This is shown by the following sequence of equalities:
p(xθ)
∆R( )=min max p(θ)p(xθ)log | (5.27a)
H q(x) p(θ) | q(x)
x θ
XX
p(xθ)
=max min p(θ)p(xθ)log | (5.27b)
p(θ) q(x) | q(x)
x θ
XX
p(xθ)
=max p(θ)p(xθ)log | (5.27c)
p(θ) | p(x)
x θ
XX
=C(p(xθ)), (5.27d)
|
where the first equality follows since the average of a set of numbers is
no larger than any of the numbers; the second is a consequence of the
minimax theorem since the term p(θ)p(xθ)log(p(xθ)/q(x)) is
x θ | |
convex in q(x) and concave in p(θ); and the third equality follows by
P P
Gibbs’ inequality (see Sec. 2.6 and (A.5) in Appendix A). As a final
note, the mutual information I(x;θ) between model parameter and
data also plays a central role in obtaining bounds on the performance
of estimation [91].
Part III
Unsupervised Learning
6
Unsupervised Learning
Unlike supervised learning, unsupervised learning tasks operate over
unlabelled data sets. Apart from this general statement, unsupervised
learning is more loosely defined than supervised learning, and it also
lacks a strong theoretical framework to mirror the PAC learning the-
ory covered in the previous chapter. Nevertheless, it is widely expected
that future breakthroughs in machine learning will come mainly from
advances in the theory and design of unsupervised learning algorithms.
This is due to the availability of huge repositories of unlabelled data,
as well as to the broader applicability of learning tasks whereby the
machine learns, as it were, without supervision or feedback. Unsuper-
vised learning is also considered by some as the key to the development
of general, as opposed to task, specific AI [137] (see also [142, 87] for
more on general AI).
Generally speaking, unsupervised learning algorithms aim at learn-
ing some properties of interest of the mechanism underlying the gen-
eration of the data. In this sense, unsupervised learning concerns the
study of generative models, although, as we will see, this statement
comes with some caveats. A common aspect of many models used for
unsupervised learning is the presence of hidden, or latent, variables
130
6.1. Unsupervised Learning 131
that help explain the structure of the data.
Thischapterstartsbydiscussingapplicationsofunsupervisedlearn-
ing, and by providing a description of the well-known K-means algo-
rithm. It then covers directed and undirected generative probabilistic
models for unsupervisedlearning. As we will detail, these models posit
different types of statistical dependence relations between hidden and
measured variables. Discriminative models, which capture the depen-
denceofhiddenvariablesonobservedvariables,aswellasautoencoders,
which combine discriminative and generative models, are also intro-
duced. The chapter is concluded with a discussion of a different type
of learning algorithm that may be considered as unsupervised, namely
PageRank, which is included due to its practical relevance.
6.1 Unsupervised Learning
Defining unsupervised learning. A general, and rather imprecise,
definition of unsupervised learning tasks is the following. Taking a fre-
quentist viewpoint, we are given a data set consisting of N i.i.d.
D
unlabelled observations x RD. These are assumed to be drawn i.i.d.
n
∈
from an unknown true distribution as
= x N p(x). (6.1)
D { n }n=1 i.∼i.d.
The goal is to learn some useful properties of the distribution p(x),
where the properties of interest depend on the specific application.
While this definition is general enough to include also the estimation
problems studied in Chapter 3, as mentioned, unsupervised learning
problems are typically characterized by the presence of hidden or la-
tent variables. Notable examples include the following.
Density estimation: Density estimation aims at learning directly
•
a good approximation of the distribution p(x), e.g., for use in plug-in
estimators [86], to design compression algorithms (see Sec. 2.5), or to
detect outliers [139].
Clustering: Clustering assumes the presence of an unobserved
•
label z associated to each data point x , and the goal is that of recov-
n n
ering the labels z for all points in the data set . For example, one
n
D
132 Unsupervised Learning
may wishtocluster a set of text documentsaccording totheir topics,
D
by modelling the latter as an unobserved label z . Broadly speaking,
n
this requires to group together documents that are similar according
to some metric. It is important at this point to emphasize the distinc-
tion between classification and clustering: While the former assumes
the availability of a labelled set of training examples and evaluates its
(generalization) performance on a separate set of unlabelled examples,
thelatter workswithasingle,unlabelled,setofexamples.Thedifferent
notation used for the labels – z in lieu of t – is meant to provide a
n n
reminder of this key difference.
Dimensionality reduction and representation: Given theset ,we
• D
wouldliketorepresentthedatapointsx inaspaceoflowerdimen-
n
∈ D
sionality. This makes it possible to highlight independent explanatory
factors, and/or to ease visualization and interpretation [93], e.g., for
text analysis via vector embedding (see, e.g., [124]).
Feature extraction: Feature extraction is the task of derivingfunc-
•
tionsofthedatapointsx thatprovideusefullower-dimensionalinputs
n
for tasks such as supervised learning. The extracted features are unob-
served, and hence latent, variables. As an example, the hidden layer of
a deep neural network extract features from the data for use by the
output layer (see Sec. 4.5).
Generation of new samples: The goal here is to learn a machine
•
that is able to produce samples that are approximately distributed ac-
cordingtothetruedistributionp(x).Forexample,incomputergraphics
forfilmmakingorgaming,onemaywanttotrainasoftware thatis able
to produce artificial scenes based on a given description.
The variety of tasks and the difficulty in providing formal defini-
tions, e.g., on the realism of an artificially generated image, make unsu-
pervised learning, at least in its current state, a less formal field than
supervised learning. Often, loss criteria in unsupervised learning mea-
sure the divergence between the learned model and the empirical data
distribution, but there are important exceptions, as we will see.
6.1. Unsupervised Learning 133
Figure 6.1: (a) Directed generative models; (b) Undirected generative models; (c)
Discriminative models; (d) Autoencoders.
Models. We now review the type of models that can be used to
tackle unsupervised learning problems. The models will be further dis-
cussed in the subsequent sections of this chapter.
Directed generative models: Directed generative models are mix-
•
ture models in which the distribution p(xθ) of the data is defined by a
|
parametrizedpriorp(z θ)ofthelatentvariableszandbyaparametrized
|
conditional distribution p(xz,θ) that defines the relationship between
|
latent and observed variables. Accordingly, the distribution can be ex-
pressed, for discrete latent variables z, as
p(xθ)= p(z θ)p(xz,θ). (6.2)
| | |
z
X
A similar expression applies to continuous hidden variables with an in-
tegral in lieu of the sum. Directed models are suitable to capture the
cause-effect relationships between z and x. A BN describing directed
generative models is shown in Fig. 6.1(a). Graphical models, including
BNs, will be covered in detail in the next chapter. Examples of di-
rected generative models include the mixture of Gaussians model, and
the so-called likelihood-free models, in which the conditional distribu-
tion p(xz,θ) is implemented by a deterministic transformation, most
|
typically a multi-layer network.
Undirected generative models: Undirected models parametrize di-
•
rectly the joint distribution of the observed variables x and the hidden
variables z as p(x,z θ), and accordingly write the distribution of the
|
134 Unsupervised Learning
data as
p(xθ)= p(x,z θ). (6.3)
| |
z
X
Unlike directed models, undirected models capture the affinity, or com-
patibility, ofgiven configurations ofvaluesforzandx.AnMarkov Ran-
dom Field (MRF) describing undirected generative models is shown in
Fig. 6.1(b) (see next chapter). A prominent example is given by RBMs.
Discriminative models: Discriminative modelsattempt todirectly
•
learn an encoding probabilistic mapping p(z x,θ) between the data
|
point x and a representation z. This is represented by the BN in Fig.
6.1(c).
Autoencoders: As seen in Fig. 6.1(d), autoencoders compose a
•
parametrized discriminative model p(z x,θ), which produces the hid-
|
den variables z from the data x, with a parametrized generative model
p(xz,θ). The former is known as encoder, while the latter as decoder.
|
Accordingly, the latent variables are also referred to as the code. The
most typical implementations use parameterized deterministic func-
tions z = F (x) and x= G (z) in lieu of the more general probabilistic
θ θ
modelsp(z x,θ)andp(xz,θ),respectively.Aswewillsee,autoencoders
| |
are trained to reproduce the data x at the output, turning the unsu-
pervised problem into a supervised one with “labels” given by the data
point x itself.
6.2 K-Means Clustering
We start by reviewing the well-known K-means clustering algorithm.
The purposehere is to emphasize an algorithmic structure, namely the
Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm, that is conceptually at the
core of many unsupervised learning algorithms.
The problem is one of multi-cluster clustering: Given a data set
= x N , we would like to assign every vector x RD to one
D { n }n=1 n ∈
of K clusters. Cluster indices are encoded by categorical variables z
n
via one-hot encoding (see Chapter 3). Accordingly, we write the kth
component of vector z as z = 1 if x is assigned to cluster k, while
n kn n
we write z = 0 otherwise. It is emphasized that the labels are not
kn
given for any of the examples in . Therefore, the algorithm should
D
6.2. K-Means Clustering 135
discern some regularity in the data in order to divide the data set into
K classes.
K-means is a heuristic method that attempts to cluster together
points that are mutually close in Euclidean distance. To this end, K-
means assigns all points in the same cluster a given “prototype” repre-
sentative vector µ . This vector can bethought of in terms of quantiza-
k
tion:allpointswithinagiven cluster canbequantized totheprototype
µ with minimal quadratic loss. This is formalized by the following op-
k
timization problem over the cluster assignment variables z and the
n
cluster representatives µ :
k
N K
min z d(x ,µ ), (6.4)
kn n k
{zn},{µk}
n=1k=1
X X
where d(x,µ) = x µ 2 is the squared Euclidean distance. When us-
k − k
ing a general distance metric, the approach to be described is instead
known as the K-medoids algorithm. In this regard, we note, for in-
stance, that it is possible to apply clustering also to discrete data as
long as the distance d is properly defined – typically by a matrix of
pairwise dissimilarities.
The K-means algorithm performs alternatively optimization of the
cluster assignment variables z and of the cluster representatives µ as
n k
follows:
Initialize cluster representatives µold .
• { k }
Expectation step, orEstep:Forfixedvectors µold ,solveproblem
• { k }
(6.4) over the cluster assignment z :
n
{ }
1 for k = argmin d(x ,µold)
znew = j n j . (6.5)
kn 0 otherwise

Accordingly, each training pointis assigned to thecluster with the clos-
est prototype. Note that this step generally requires the computation
of K distances for each data point x .
n
Maximization step, or M step: For fixed vectors z , solve prob-
n
• { }
lem(6.4)overtheclusterrepresentatives µ .Imposingtheoptimality
k
{ }
condition that the gradient of the objective function in (6.4) be zero,
136 Unsupervised Learning
we obtain
N znewx
µnew = n=1 kn n . (6.6)
k N znew
P n=1 kn
The new cluster representative µnPew for each cluster k is the mean of
k
the data points assigned to cluster k.
If a convergence criterion is not satisfied, set {µold µnew
• k } ← { k }
and return to the E step.
Since both E step and M step minimize the objective function in
(6.4), respectively over the cluster assignment variables z and the
n
cluster representatives µ , the value of the objective function is non-
k
decreasingacross theiterations. Thisensuresconvergence. Illustrations
ofconvergence andexamples canbefoundin[23,Chapter9].Asanote,
the algorithm is also known as Lloyd-Max quantization [54].
At a high level, K-means alternates between: (i) making inferences
about the hidden variables {z } based on the current model defined
n
by the representatives {µ } in the E step; and (ii) updating the model
k
{µ } to match the data {x } and the inferred variables {z } in the
k n n
M step. We will see that a similar algorithmic structure is applied by
many unsupervised learning algorithms.
Before we move on to discussing more general solutions, it is worth
spending a few words on the problem of selecting the number K of
clusters. A first possibility is to add or remove clusters until certain
heuristiccriteriaaresatisfied,suchasthe“purity”ofclusters.Asecond
approach is hierarchical clustering, whereby one builds a tree, known
as dendrogram, that includes clustering solutions with an increasing
number of clusters as one moves away from the root (see, e.g., [51]).
Yet another solution is to let K be selected automatically by adopting
a non-parametric Bayesian approach via a Dirichlet process prior [104].
6.3 ML, ELBO and EM
In this section, we discuss two key technical tools that are extensively
used in tackling unsupervised learning problems, namely the Evidence
LowerBOund(ELBO)andtheEMalgorithm.Thestartingpointisthe
fundamentalproblemoflearningaprobabilistic,directedorundirected,
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 137
modelp(xθ)fromthedatausingML.Wewilldiscusslaterhowtolearn
|
discriminative models and autoencoders.
6.3.1 ML Learning
From Sec. 2.6, we know that ML, asymptotically in N, tends to min-
imize a KL divergence between the true distribution p(x) and the se-
lected hypothesis in the model. This is a criterion that is well suited
for many of the unsupervised learning tasks mentioned above, such as
density estimation or generation of new samples, and it is hence useful
to start the discussion with ML learning.
Beforewedothat,afewremarksareinorder.First,itisoftenuseful
to choose divergences other than KL, which are tailored to the specific
application of interest [8]. We will further discuss this aspect in Sec.
6.4.3. Second, when the goal is representation learning, the machine
aims at obtaining useful features z. Hence, minimizing the KL diver-
gence to match the true distribution p(x) does not directly address the
objective of representation learning, unless appropriate restrictions are
imposedonthemodelp(xz,θ).Infact,ifthegenerativemodelp(xz,θ)
| |
is too powerful, then it can disregard the features z and still obtain a
high likelihood for the data (see, e.g., [69]). We will get back to this
point in Sec. 6.6. Finally, obtaining ML solutions is often impractical,
particularly in large models. Nevertheless, understandingthe ML prob-
lem allows one to better gauge the impact of the approximations and
simplifications made to obtain efficient algorithms.
Toproceed,weconsiderprobabilistic,directedorundirected,model,
and focus, for the purpose of simplifying the notation, on a data set
with a single data point (N = 1). The extension to a data set with an
arbitrary number N of points only requires adding an outer sum over
the sample index to the LL function. We also concentrate on discrete
hiddenrvs,andthe generalization to continuous rvsis obtained by sub-
stituting sums with suitable integrals. The ML problem can be written
as the maximization of the LL function as
max lnp(xθ)= ln p(x,z θ) , (6.7)
θ | | !
z
X
138 Unsupervised Learning
where x denotes the data and z the hidden or latent variables. Note
the marginalization with respect to the hidden variables in (6.7). This
problemshouldbecontrastedwiththesupervisedlearningMLproblem
obtained when both x and z are observed, namely
max lnp(x,z θ). (6.8)
θ |
Example6.1. ConsideradirectedgenerativeBernoulli-Gaussianmodel
characterized as
z Bern(0.5) (6.9a)
∼
x z = 0 (2,1) (6.9b)
| ∼ N
x z = 1 (θ,1). (6.9c)
| ∼ N
This corresponds to a mixture of Gaussians model, in which the only
parameter θ is the mean of one of the two Gaussian components. As-
sume that we observe x = 0. Consider first the supervised learning
case, where we assume that we also measure z = 1. In this case, the
LL function in (6.8) is lnp(x = 0,z = 1θ) = ln (xθ,1) + ln(0.5).
| N |
In contrast, with unsupervised learning, the LL function in (6.7) is
lnp(x = 0θ)= ln(0.5 (02,1)+0.5 (0θ,1)).
| N | N |
The LL functions are shown in Fig. 6.2. Unlike supervised learning,
the LL for unsupervised learning is seen to be non-concave. In this
example, this is a consequence of the fact that, when θ is sufficiently
large in absolute value, the probability of the data x resulting from the
fixed Gaussian distribution centered at x = 2 makes the contribution
of the Gaussian centered θ increasingly irrelevant.
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 139
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5
-4
-4.5
-5
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
doohilekil-goL
supervised
unsupervised
Figure 6.2: Illustration of LL functions for supervised and unsupervised learning
in a mixture of Gaussians model (Example6.1).
Solvingproblem(6.7)hastwoadditionalcomplicationsascompared
to the supervised learning counterpart (6.8). The first issue was high-
lighted in the previous example: Even for models in which the ML
supervisedlearning problem is convex, the LL is generally non-concave
when the variables z are hidden, which precludes the use of convex
optimization algorithms. Barring the use of often impractical global
optimization algorithms, in general, non-convex problems cannot be
solved exactly. Rather, the best one can hope for with standard local
optimization schemes, such as SGD, is obtaining stationary points or
locally optimalpoints[28].Inpractice,thisproblemmaynotbecritical
sincenon-convexityisnotbyitselfacauseofpoorlearningperformance.
For instance, as seen in Chapter 4, beyond-GLM supervised learning
methods, including deep neural networks, solve non-convex problems.
Thesecondcomplication istheneedtosum–orintegrate–overthe
hidden variables in order to evaluate the LL. This step is complicated
by the fact that the distribution of the hidden variables needs to be
learned and is hence unknown. This is a significant obstacle to the
development of efficient learning algorithms, and it generally needs to
be addressed in order to make learning feasible. In the rest of this
section, we describe two technical tools that are useful to tackle these
140 Unsupervised Learning
problems. Chapter 8 will develop more complex solutions for issues
arising in the presence of large latent spaces in which marginalization
is not viable.
6.3.2 ELBO
Many methods to tackle the ML problem (6.7) are based on the maxi-
mization oftheELBO.ThesetechniquesincludetheEMalgorithm and
some of the variational inference algorithms to be discussed in Chapter
8.Thekey elementinthedevelopmentof theELBOis theintroduction
of an auxiliary distributionq(z) on thelatent variables. Thisis referred
to as the variational distribution or the variational posterior for rea-
sons that will be made clear later. As we will see, computation of the
ELBO requires an average over distribution q(z), which can be fixed
independently of the model parameters. This solves the key problem
identified above of averaging over the parameter-dependent marginal
of the hidden variables.
Definition 6.1. For any fixed value x and any distribution q(z) on
the latent variables z (possibly dependent on x), the ELBO (q,θ) is
L
defined in one of the following equivalent forms
(q,θ)=E [lnp(x,zθ) lnq(z)] (6.10)
z∼q(z)
L | −
learningsignal
=E [|lnp(x,zθ{z)]+ H(q}) (6.11)
z∼q(z)
|
negativeenergy entropy
=|E [ln{zp(xz,θ)}] |K{zL}(q(z) p(z θ)) (6.12)
z∼q(z)
| − || |
cross-entropy variationalregularization
=| KL(q({zz) p(x,z}θ)) | {z } (6.13)
− || |
=lnp(xθ) KL(q(z) p(z x,θ)), (6.14)
| − || |
where we have identified some terms using common terminology that
will be clarified in the following, and, in (6.13), we have used the con-
vention of defining KL(p q) even when q is not normalized (see Sec.
||
2.6).
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 141
The equivalence between the three forms of the ELBO can be eas-
ily checked. The form (6.11) justifies the definition of the negative of
the ELBO as variational free energy or Gibbs free energy, which is the
difference of energy and entropy. This form is particularly useful for
undirected models in which one specifies directly the joint distribution
p(x,z θ), such as energy-based models, while the form (6.12) is espe-
|
ciallywellsuitedfordirectedmodelsthataccountforthediscriminative
distribution p(xz,θ), such as for deep neural networks [27]. For both
|
forms the first term can be interpreted as a cross-entropy loss. The
form (6.13) is more compact, and suggests that, as we will formalize
below, the ELBO is maximized when q(z) is selected to match the
model distribution. The last form yields terms that are generally not
easily computable, but it illuminates the relationship between the LL
function and the ELBO, as we discuss next.
Thefollowing theorem describesthedefiningpropertyof theELBO
as well as another important property. Taken together, these features
make the ELBO uniquely suited for the development of algorithmic
solutions for problem (6.7).
Theorem 6.1. The ELBO is a global lower bound on the LL function,
that is,
lnp(xθ) (q,θ), (6.15)
| ≥ L
where equality holds at a value θ if and only if the distribution q(z)
0
satisfies q(z) = p(z x,θ ). Furthermore, the ELBO is concave in q(z)
0
|
for a fixed θ; and, if lnp(x,z θ) is concave in θ, it is also concave in θ
|
for a fixed q(z).
Proof. Thefirstpartof thetheorem follows immediately from theform
(6.14), which we can rewrite as
lnp(xθ)= (q,θ)+KL(q(z) p(z x,θ)), (6.16)
| L || |
and from Gibbs’ inequality. In fact, the latter implies that the KL di-
vergence KL(q(z) p(z x,θ)) is non-negative and equal to zero if and
|| |
only if the two distributions in the argument are equal. The concavity
of the ELBO can be easily checked using standard properties of con-
vex functions [28]. As a note, an alternative proof of the first part of
142 Unsupervised Learning
the theorem can be provided via the importance sampling trick and
Jensen’s inequality. In fact, we can write
lnp(xθ)=ln p(x,z θ) (6.17a)
| z | !
X
p(x,z θ)
=ln q(z) | (6.17b)
q(z) !
z
X
p(x,z θ)
q(z)ln | = (q,θ), (6.17c)
≥ q(z) L
z (cid:18) (cid:19)
X
where the first equality is just obtained by multiplying and dividing
by q(z) – the importance sampling trick – and the last step is a conse-
quence of Jensen’s inequality. We recall that Jensen’s inequality says
that for any concave function f(x) – here f(x) = ln(x) – we have the
inequality E[f(x)] f(E[x]).
≤
We illustrate the just described properties of the ELBO via the
following example.
Example6.2. ConsideragainthedirectedgenerativeBernoulli-Gaussian
model (6.9). The posterior distribution of the latent variable given an
observation x is given as
(0θ,1)
p(z = 1x = 0,θ) = N | . (6.18)
| (02,1)+ (0θ,1)
N | N |
Fix a parametrized variational distribution q(z ϕ) = Bern(z ϕ). Using
| |
(6.11), the ELBO is then given as
(q,θ)= ϕ(ln( (0θ,1)+ln(0.5))+(1 ϕ)(ln( (02,1)+ln(0.5))+H(q).
L N | − N |
(6.19)
Thetheoremabovesaysthat,givenanyvalueofϕ,theELBOisalower
bound on the LL function, uniformly for all values of θ. Furthermore,
this bound is tight. i.e., it equals the LL function, at all values θ for
0
whichtheselectedvariationaldistributionq(z ϕ)equalstheposteriorof
|
the hidden variables, that is, for which we have ϕ = p(z = 1x = 0,θ ).
0
|
This is shown in Fig. 6.3, where we plot the LL and the ELBO. We see
that indeed the ELBO is a uniform lower bound on the LL, which is
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 143
tight for specific values θ of the parameter θ. Reflecting the concavity
0
property of the ELBO in the theorem, the ELBO is also seen to be a
concave function of the parameter θ.
-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
-3.5
-4
-4.5
-5
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
doohilekil-goL
NLL
ELBO ( = 3)
0
ELBO ( = 2)
0
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the ELBO for two different choices of the variational
distribution that are tight at different valuesθ of theparameter.
0
The lower bound property of the ELBO makes it useful not only
for the purpose of ML optimization but also as an estimate of LL, and
henceofhowwellthemodelfitsthedata,forthegoalofmodelselection.
Furthermore, the ELBO can be computed analytically in special cases
for exponential models [151, 159].
The ELBO can be generalized as the multi-sample ELBO [32]:
K
1 p(x,z θ)
k
lnp(xθ) E ln | . (6.20)
| ≥
z1,...,zK
i.
∼
i.d.
q(z)
" K k=1 q(z k ) !#
X
The proof of this inequality follows in the same way as for the ELBO.
This bound has the advantage that, as K grows large, it tends to be-
come increasingly accurate. In fact, as K , by the law of large
→ ∞
numbers, we have the limit K−1 K p(x,z θ)/q(z ) p(x,z θ)
k=1 k | k → z |
with probability one.
P P
ELBO and Bayesian inference. In summary, for a given vari-
ational distribution q(z), the ELBO provides an upper bound on the
LL function, or equivalently a lower bound on the NLL function. This
144 Unsupervised Learning
bound is tight for values of the parameter vectors θ at which we have
the equality q(z) = p(z x,θ). As such, given a certain value θ of the
|
parameter vector, the variational distribution q(z) that provides the
tightest bound is the posterior distribution q(z) = p(z x,θ), at which
|
the KL divergence in (6.16) vanishes. That is, in order to obtain the
tightest ELBO, one needs to solve the Bayesian inference problem of
computing the posterior p(z x,θ) of the hidden variables for the given
|
value θ. This property can be stated for reference as follows
argmax (q,θ)= p(z x,θ). (6.21)
q(z) L |
Gradients of the LL and of the ELBO over the model
parameters.∗ Under suitable differentiability assumptions, the gradi-
ent of the ELBO at the value θ in which the ELBO is tight coincides
0
with the gradient of the LL, i.e.,
lnp(xθ) = (p(z x,θ ),θ)
∇
θ
| |
θ=θ0
∇
θ
L |
0
|
θ=θ0
= E [ lnp(x,zθ) ]. (6.22)
z∼p(z|x,θ0)
∇
θ
| |
θ=θ0
This is also suggested by the curves in Fig. 6.3. We will see with an
example in Sec. 6.5.1 that this formula is extremely useful when the
gradientforthecompletelog-likelihood lnp(x,zθ) canbeeasily
∇
θ
| |
θ=θ0
computed, such as for exponential family models.
Other global lower bounds on the likelihood.∗ Revisiting the
proof of Theorem 6.1, it can be concluded that the following general
family of lower bounds
p(x,z θ)
f(p(xθ)) E f | , (6.23)
z∼q(z)
| ≥ q(z)
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)
foranyconcavefunctionf.WhiletheELBOequalsthenegativeofaKL
divergence between variational distribution and the true distribution,
as seen in (6.13), this representation yields more general divergence
measures, such as the α-divergence to be discussed in Chapter 8 [90,
13, 159].
6.3.3 EM Algorithm
As mentioned, a large number of practical schemes for unsupervised
learning using directed and undirected generative models are based on
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 145
Initialize parameter vector θold.
•
E step: For fixed parameter vector θold, maximize the ELBO over
•
the variational distribution q, i.e., solve problem max (q,θold), which,
q L
by (6.21), yields the new distribution
qnew(z) = p(z x,θold). (6.24)
|
M step: For fixed variational distribution qnew(z), maximize the
•
ELBO over the parameter vector θ, i.e., solve problem max (qnew,θ).
θ L
This convex problem can be equivalently written as the maximization
of the negative energy
max Q(θ,θold) =E [lnp(x,zθ)]. (6.25)
θ
z∼p(z|x,θold)
|
If a convergence criterion is not satisfied, set θnew θoldand return
• ←
to the E step.
Table 6.1: EM algorithm.
the maximization of ELBO (q,θ) in lieu of the LL function. As seen,
L
this maximization has the key advantage that the ELBO is a concave
function of the parameters θ. Furthermore, the lower bound property
(6.15) ensures that, if the ELBO is tight at a value θ , the result of
0
the optimization of the ELBO must necessarily yield a LL value that
is no smaller than lnp(xθ ). This observation is leveraged by the EM
0
|
algorithm to obtain a procedure that is guaranteed to converge to a
stationary point of the original ML problem (6.7).
The EM algorithm is described in Table 6.1.
Inmanyproblemsofinterest,themodelp(x,zθ)canbetaken tobe
|
either theproductof a prior anda likelihood from the exponential fam-
ily for directed models, or directly a member of the exponential family
for undirected models. In these cases, the problem (6.25) solved in the
M step will be seen below via an example to reduce to the correspond-
ing supervised learning problem, with the caveat that the sufficient
statistics are averaged over the posterior distribution p(z x,θold).
|
The EM algorithm is an instance of the more general Majorization
146 Unsupervised Learning
Minimization (MM)algorithm [141].Inthisclass ofalgorithms,ateach
iteration, one constructs a tight lower bound of the objective function
at the current iterate θold. This bound, which should be easy to max-
imize, is then optimized, yielding the new iterate θnew. The process is
illustrated in Fig. 6.4. As it can be seen, at each iteration one is guar-
anteed that the objective function is not decreased, which ensures con-
vergence to a local optimum of the original problem. In EM, the tight
lower bound is the ELBO (qnew,θ), which is obtained by computing
L
the posterior distribution of the latent variables qnew(z) = p(z x,θold)
|
at the current iterate θold.
LL
old new ...
Figure 6.4: Illustration of the EM algorithm. The dashed line is the LL function.
The solid lines represent the ELBOs corresponding to the first two steps of the
algorithm, while the dashed-dotted line is the ELBO after a number of iterations.
Ateachstep,EMmaximizestheELBO,whichisalowerboundontheLLfunction.
EM is an instance of themore general MM approach [141].
Generalizing the K-means algorithm, the EM algorithm alternates
between: (i) making inferences about the hidden variables z based on
the model defined by the current iterate of the model parameter θ
in the E step; and (ii) updating the model θ to match the data x
and the inferred variables z in the M step. It is useful to emphasize
6.3. ML, ELBO and EM 147
that unsupervised learning, even in the assumed frequentist approach,
entails the Bayesian inference problem of evaluating the posterior of
the hidden variables.
Generalization to N observations. We conclude this section by
making explicit the generalization of the EM algorithm to the case in
whichwe have N i.i.d. observations. To elaborate, assumethatwe have
pairs of observed/ unobserved i.i.d. variables (x ,z ), whose assumed
n n
joint distribution can be written as p(xN,zN θ)= N p(x ,z θ).
| n=1 n n |
Estep:TheEsteprequiresthecomputationoftheposteriorp(zN xN,θ).
Q |
This can be seen to factorize across the examples, since we have
p(xN,zN θ) n p(x ,z θ)
p(zN xN,θ)= | = n n |
| p(xN θ) p(x θ)
| n Y =1 n |
n
= p(z x ,θ). (6.26)
n n
|
n=1
Y
Therefore,inordertocomputetheposterior,wecanoperateseparately
for each example in the data set by evaluating p(z x ,θ) for all n =
n n
|
1,...,N.
M step: In a similar manner,the negative energy function Q(θ,θold)
to be used in the M step can be computed separately for each example
as
Q(θ,θold) = E lnp(xN,zN θ)
zN∼p(zN|xN,θold)
|
N h i
= E [lnp(x ,z θ)], (6.27)
zn∼p(zn|xn,θold) n n
|
n=1
X
and hence separately for each example. Note that the optimization in
the M step should instead be done jointly on (6.27).
Extensions.∗ The EM algorithm solves the non-convexity prob-
lem identified at the beginning of this section by optimizing ELBOs
iteratively according to the outlined MM mechanism. Nevertheless, im-
plementing the EM algorithm may be too computationally demanding
in practice. In fact, the E step requires to compute the posterior dis-
tribution of the latent variables, which may be intractable when the
latent space is large; and the M step entails an average over the poste-
rior distribution, which can also be intractable. In Chapter 8, we will
148 Unsupervised Learning
see approaches to overcome these problems via approximate inference
and learning techniques. For extensions of EM algorithm, we refer to
[15, pp. 247-248]. In this regard, it is observed here that the EM al-
gorithm applies also to scenarios in which different data points have
generally different subsets of unobserved variables.
6.4 Directed Generative Models
Inthis section, we discuss directed generative models,in which,as seen
in Fig. 6.1(a), one posits a parametrized prior p(z θ) of the latent vari-
|
ables z and a parametrized conditional decoding distribution p(xz,θ).
|
As discussed, the goal can be that of learning the distribution p(x) of
the true data or to extract useful features z. In the latter case, the use
of directed generative model is referred to as performing analysis by
synthesis. We first discuss two prototypical applications of EM to per-
form ML learning. We then outline an alternative approach, known as
GAN, which can be thought of as a generalization of ML. Accordingly,
rather than selecting a priori the KL divergence as a performance met-
ric, as done implicitly by ML, GANs learn at the same time divergence
and generative model.
Multi-layer extensions of generative directed models discussed here
fall in the category of Helmholtz machines. We refer to, e.g., [42], for a
discussion about the task of training these networks via an approxima-
tion of the EM algorithm, which uses tools covered in Chapter 8.
6.4.1 Mixture of Gaussians Model
The mixture of Gaussians model can be described by the following
directed generative model
z Cat(π) (6.28a)
n
∼
x z = k (µ ,Σ ), (6.28b)
n n k k
| ∼ N
with parameter vector θ = [π,µ ,...,µ ,Σ ,...,Σ ]. We use one-
0 K−1 0 K−1
hot encoding for the categorical variables z = [z ,...,z ]T. Note
n 0n (K−1)n
that this model can be thought as an unsupervisedversion of the QDA
model for the fully observed, or supervised, case studied in Sec. 4.6
6.4. Directed Generative Models 149
(cf. (4.44)). We will see below that the EM algorithm leverages this
observation in the M step. Furthermore, it will be observed that EM
for mixture of Gaussians generalizes the K-means algorithm.
E step. In the E step, as per (6.26), we need to solve the inference
problem of computing the posterior p(z x ,θold) for every example n
kn n
|
andcluster indexk = 0,...,K 1. Inthis case,this can bedonedirectly
−
via Bayes’ theorem since the normalization requires to sum only over
the K possible values taken by z , yielding
n
πold (x µold,Σold)
p(z = 1x ,θold)= k N n | k k . (6.29)
kn | n K−1πold (x µold,Σold)
j=0 j N n | j j
P
M step. In the M step, we need to maximize the negative energy
function Q(θ,θold) in (6.27). Each term in the sum can be computed
directly as
K−1
E [lnp(x ,z θ)] = z¯ lnπ +ln (x µ ,Σ )
zn∼p(zn|xn,θold) n n
|
kn
{
k
N
n
|
k k
}
k=0
X
(6.30)
with
z¯ = E [z ] = p(z = 1x ,θold). (6.31)
kn zn∼p(zn|xn,θold) kn kn
|
n
As it can be easily checked, the function Q(θ,θold) equals the LL func-
tion of the QDA supervised problem, in which the variables z are
n
observed, with the following caveat: the sufficient statistics z are
kn
replaced by their posterior averages z¯ . As a result, as opposed to su-
kn
pervised learning, EM describes each example x as being part of all
n
clusters, with the “responsibility” of cluster k being given by z¯ . Hav-
kn
ing made this observation, we can now easily optimize the Q(θ,θold)
function by using the ML solutions (4.45) for QDA by substituting z¯
kn
for the observed variable t .
kn
Setting Σ = ǫI as a known parameter and letting ǫ 0 recovers
k
→
the K-means algorithm [23, p. 443].
150 Unsupervised Learning
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-5 0 5
Figure6.5:Truedistribution(dashedline)andmixtureofGaussiansmodellearned
via EM (solid line).
Example 6.3. Consider data generated from the multi-modal distribu-
tion shown in Fig. 6.5 as a dashed line, which obtained as a mixture
of two Gaussians and an exponential distribution. When M = 1, the
mixture of Gaussians distribution learned via EM corresponds to the
conventional MLestimate,andishenceobtainedviamomentmatching
(see Chapter 3). This is plotted in the figure for a given data realiza-
tion with N = 100. Running EM with the larger values M = 2 and
M = 3 also returns the same distribution. This distribution is seen to
beinclusiveoftheentiresupportofthetruedistributionandtosmooth
out the edges of the original distribution. As we will further discuss in
Sec. 6.4.3, this is a consequence of the fact that ML minimizes the KL
divergence over the second argument.
A similar model that applies to binary data, rather than continu-
ous data, such as black-and-white images, is the mixture of Bernoullis
model. The EM algorithm can be derived by following the same steps
detailed here [23].
6.4. Directed Generative Models 151
6.4.2 Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis
Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis (PPCA) is a popular gen-
erative model that describes the data in terms of M < D features that
are linearly related to the data vector. Specifically, PPCA uses a linear
factor generative model with M < D features described as
z (0,I) (6.32a)
n
∼ N
x z = z (Wz+µ,σ2I), (6.32b)
n n
| ∼ N
with parameter vector θ = (W µ σ). Equivalently, according to PPCA,
the data vector can be written as
x = Wz +µ+q , (6.33)
n n n
with the latent variables z (0,I) and the additive noise q
n n
∼ N ∼
(0,σ2I). According to (6.33), the columns w of the matrix W =
k
N { }
[w w w ] can be interpreted as linear features of the data. This is
1 2 M
···
in the sense that each data point is written as a linear combination of
the feature vectors as
M
x = w z +µ+q , (6.34)
n m mn n
m=1
X
where z is the mth component of the latent vector z .
mn n
In the models studied above, the latent variable was a categorical
identifier of the class of the observation. As such, In PPCA, instead,
the representation of an observation x in the hidden variable space
n
is distributed across all the variables in vector z . This yields a more
n
efficientencodingofthehiddenrepresentation.Thisisparticularlyclear
in the case discrete hidden rv, which will be further discussed in Sec.
6.5.1 (see also [20]).
An EM algorithm can be devised to learn the parameter vector as
described in [23, p. 577]. The E step leverages the known result that
the posterior of the latent variables can be written as
z x = x ,θ (z J−1WT(x µ),J−1), (6.35)
n n n n n
| ∼ N | −
with matrix J = σ−2WTW +I.
152 Unsupervised Learning
We note that, if we model the latent variables z , k = 1,...,M,
kn
are independent but not Gaussian, we obtain a type of Independent
Component Analysis (ICA) (see [23, p. 591]). It is also possible to
impose structure on the latent vector by selecting suitable marginal
distributions p(z). For instance, choosing Student’s t-distribution or a
Laplace distribution tends to impose sparsity on the learned model. A
general discussion on linear factor models can be found in [104] (see
also [36] for a generalization of PPCA to any model in the exponential
family).
6.4.3 GAN
InSec.2.6,wehave seen thatMLcan beinterpreted,intheasymptotic
regime of a large data set N, as minimizing the KL divergence between
thetruedistributionofthedataandthemodel.Westartthissectionby
revisiting this argument for unsupervisedlearning in order to highlight
asimilarinterpretation thatholdsforfinitevaluesofN.Thisviewpoint
will lead us to generalize the ML learning approach to techniques in
whichthechoiceofthedivergencemeasureisadaptedtothedata.Asan
important by-product, the resulting technique, known as GAN, will be
seen toaccommodate easily likelihood-free models.GANs arecurrently
considered to yield state-of-the-art results for image generation [57].
To simplify the discussion, assume that variables x are categorical
n
and take a finite number of values. To start, let us observe that the
NLL function (6.1) for i.i.d. data can be written as
N
1 N[x]
lnp(x θ)= lnp(xθ), (6.36)
n
−N | − N |
n=1 x
X X
where we recall that N[x] = n : x = x . We now note that the
n
|{ }|
ML problem of minimizing the NLL (6.36) over θ is equivalent to the
minimization of the KL divergence
min p (x)lnp(xθ)+ p (x)lnp (x)
D D D
θ − |
x x
X X
=min KL(p (x) p(xθ)), (6.37)
D
θ || |
6.4. Directed Generative Models 153
where we have defined the empirical distribution
N[x]
p (x) = . (6.38)
D
N
We hence conclude the ML attempts to minimize the KL divergence
between the empirical distribution p (x) of the data and the model
D
distribution p(xθ). The ML problem min KL(p (x) p(xθ)) is also
θ D
| || |
known as the M-projection of the data distribution p (x) into the
D
model p(xθ) [40] (see Chapter 8 for further discussion).
{ | }
The KL divergence (6.37) is a measure of the difference between
two distribution with specific properties that may not be tailored to
the particular application of interest. For instance, distributions ob-
tained by minimizing (6.37) tend to provide “blurry” estimates of the
distribution of the data distribution, as we have seen in Fig. 6.5. As
a result, learning image distributions using M-projections is known to
cause the learned model to produce unfocused images [57].
The KL divergence is not, however, the only measure of the differ-
encebetweentwodistributions.AsdiscussedinmoredetailinAppendix
A, the KL divergence is in fact part of the larger class of f-divergences
between two distributionsp(x)and q(x).Thisclass includes divergence
measures defined by the variational expression1
D (p q) = maxE [T(x)] E [g(T(x))], (6.39)
f x∼p x∼q
|| T(x) −
for some concave increasing function g() (the meaning of the f sub-
·
script is discussed in Appendix A). The key new element in (6.39) is
the decision rule T(x), which is also known as discriminator or critic.
This function takes as input a sample x and ideally outputs a large
value when x is generated from distribution p, and a small value when
itis instead generated fromq.Optimizingover T(x)henceensuresthat
the right-hand side of (6.39) is large when the two distributions are dif-
ferent and hence can be distinguished based on the observation of x.
Whenthedomainover whichthediscriminator T(x)is optimized isleft
unconstrained, solving problem (6.39) recovers the KL divergence and
1Thetermvariationalreferstothefact thatthedefinitioninvolvesanoptimiza-
tion.
154 Unsupervised Learning
the Jensen-Shannon divergence, among others, with specific choices of
function g (see Appendix A).2
Generalizing the ML problem (6.37), GANs attempt to solve the
problem
min D (p (x) p(xθ)). (6.40)
f D
θ || |
Moreprecisely,GANsparametrizethediscriminatorT(x)bychoosinga
differentiable functionT (x) oftheparameter vector ϕ.Thiseffectively
ϕ
reduces the search space for the discriminator, and defines a different
type of divergence for each value of ϕ. A typical choice for T (x) is the
ϕ
output of a multi-layer neural network with weights ϕ or a function
thereof (see Sec. 4.5). With this in mind, using (6.39) in (6.40), we
obtain the minimax problem solved by GANs3
min maxE [T (x)] E [g(T (x))]. (6.41)
θ ϕ
x∼pD ϕ
−
x∼p(x|θ) ϕ
According to (6.41), GANs select the divergence measure adaptively
through the optimization of the discriminator T (x). Problem (6.41)
ϕ
canalsobeinterpretedintermsofastrategicgameplayedbygenerator
and discriminator [57].4
TheoriginalGANmethod[57]operatesbysettingT (x) = lnD (x),
ϕ ϕ
where D (x) is the output of a multi-layer perceptron, and g(t) =
ϕ
log(1 exp(t)). A variation that is shown to be more useful in prac-
− −
tice is also discussed in the first GAN paper (see [49]). As another
popularexample, Wasserstein GAN simply sets T (x) to bethe output
ϕ
of a multi-layer perceptron and chooses g(t) = (1 t).
− −
Application to likelihood-free models.∗ GANs are typically
used with likelihood-free models. Accordingly, the model distribution
p(xθ) is written as
|
p(xθ)= δ(x G (z)) (z 0,I)dz. (6.42)
θ
| − N |
Z
2For a given function T(x), the right-hand side of (6.39), excluding the maxi-
mization,providesalowerboundonthedivergenceD (p||q).Anotherusefulrelated
f
boundfortheKLdivergenceistheso-called Donsker-Varadhanrepresentation(see,
e.g., [18]).
3The version of GAN given here is known as f-GANs [107], which is a general-
ization of theoriginal GAN.
4It is noted that the GAN set-up is reminiscent of the adversarial model used
to definesemantic security in cryptography.
6.5. Undirected Generative Models 155
Thesamplesx arehencemodelledastheoutputofagenerator function
G (z), whose input z is given by i.i.d. Gaussian variables. This gener-
θ
ative model can hence be interpreted as a generalization of PPCA to
non-linear encoders G (z). The latter is conventionally modelled again
θ
as a multi-layer neural network.
Problem(6.41)istypically tackled usingSGD(Chapter4)byiterat-
ing between the optimization of the generator parameters θ and of the
discriminator parameters ϕ (see [8, Algorithm 1]). Learning requires
empirical approximations for the evaluation of the gradients that will
be discussed in Chapter 8.
Likelihood ratio estimation viewpoint.∗ When no constraints
are imposed over the discriminator T(x) in (6.39) and the function g
is selected as g(t) = exp(t 1), the optimal solution is given as T(x) =
−
1+ln(p (x)/p(xθ)) and the corresponding divergence measure (6.39)
D
|
is the KL divergence KL(p (x) p(xθ)). Therefore, solving problem
D
|| |
(6.39) over a sufficiently general family of functions T (x) allows one
ϕ
to obtain an estimate of the log-likelihood ratio ln(p (x)/p(xθ)). As
D
|
a result, GANs can be interpreted as carrying out the estimation of
likelihood ratios between the data and the model distributions as a
step in the learning process. The idea of estimating likelihood ratios in
order to estimate KL divergences is useful in other learning problems
based on variational inference, to be discussed in Chapter 8 (see [70]).
Some research topics.∗ Among topics of current research, we
mentionheretheproblemofregularization ofGANs[123].Wealsonote
that GANs can also be extended to supervised learning problems [108].
The GAN approach of formulating the divergence as an optimization
over a discriminator function was also recently found to be useful for
ICA [29].
6.5 Undirected Generative Models
Unlike directed generative models, undirected generative models posit
a joint distribution for the hidden and the observed variables that cap-
tures affinity, rather than causality, relationships between the two sets
of variables, as seen in Fig. 6.1(b). In this section, we discuss a repre-
sentative example of undirected generative models that is considered
156 Unsupervised Learning
to be a powerful tool for a number of applications, includingfeature se-
lection, generation of new samples, and even recommendation systems
[127]. The model, known as RBM, also finds application as a compo-
nents of larger multi-layer structures, also for supervised learning [64].
6.5.1 Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM)
RBMs are typically characterized by an M-dimensional binary hidden
vector z 0,1 M, while the observed variables may be discrete or
∈ { }
continuous. Here we consider the case of binary observed variables,
which is suitable to model, e.g., black-and-white images or positive/
negative recommendations. The RBM model is defined as (6.3), where
thejointdistributionofvisibleandlatentvariablesisalog-linearmodel,
and hence part of the exponential family. Mathematically, we have
1
p(x,z θ)= exp( E(x,z θ)), (6.43)
| Z(θ) − |
with the energy function given as
E(x,z θ) = aTz bTx xTWz, (6.44)
| − − −
andthepartition functionasZ(θ)= exp( E(x,z θ)). Theparam-
x,z − |
eter vector θ includes the M 1 vector a, the D 1 vector b and the
× P ×
D M matrix W.
×
The qualifier “restricted” captures the fact that the energy func-
tion (6.44) only features cross-terms that include one variable from x
and one from z, and not two variables from x or two from z. In other
words, the model accounts for the affinities between variables in x and
z, but not directly between variables in either x or z [20]. For instance,
if (i,j)th entry w of matrix W is a large positive number, variables
ij
x and z will tend to have equal signs in order to minimize the energy
i j
and hence maximize the probability; and the opposite is true when w
ij
is negative. As we will seen in the next chapter, this type of probabilis-
tic relationship can be represented by the undirected graphical model
known as MRF shown in Fig. 6.6.
6.5. Undirected Generative Models 157
Figure6.6:Anundirectedgraph(MRF)describingthejointdistributionprescribed
bythe RBM model (6.43)-(6.44).
From the model, it is easy to compute the distribution of each
hidden or observed variable when conditioning on all the observed or
hidden variables, respectively. In particular, we have that the variables
in z are mutually independent when conditioned on x, and, similarly,
thevariablesinxareindependentgivenz.Furthermore,theconditional
distributions are given as:
p(z = 1x,θ) =σ(wTx+a ) (6.45a)
j | j j
p(x = 1z,θ) =σ(w˜Tz+b ), (6.45b)
i | i i
where w is the jth column of W and w˜ is the ith row of matrix W re-
j i
arranged into a column vector via transposition. These relationships
reveal the significance of the binary hidden variables z in terms of fea-
tures.
In fact, as for PPCA, we can consider each column of matrix W
as a feature vector that contributes in explaining the observations. To
see this, note that (6.45a) suggests that the jth hidden variable z
j
equals 1 when the feature w is well correlated with the data point x.
j
Probability(6.45b)alsoconfirmsthisinterpretation,aseach variablez
j
multiplies the ith element of the feature vector w in defining the LLR
j
w˜Tz+b (see Sec. 3.2). Furthermore, the distributed representation of
i i
the data in terms of the binary hidden vector z is more efficient than
that provided by models with categorical variables such as the mixture
of Gaussian model. This is in the following sense. While categorical
models require to learn a number of parameters that increases linearly
withthenumberofclasses,thedistributedrepresentationwithabinary
vector z can distinguish 2D combinations of features with a number of
parameters that increases only linearly with D [20].
158 Unsupervised Learning
LearningistypicallydonebymeansofanapproximateSGDmethod
that leverages MC techniques. Recalling the general formula (3.28) for
the exponential family, the gradient at the current iteration θ = θold
can be computed using (6.22) as
lnp(xθ) = E [x z ] E [x z ],
∇
wij
| |
θ=θold zj∼p(zj|x,θold) i j
−
xi,zj∼p(x,zj|θold) i j
(6.46)
which can be further simplified using (6.45). The gradient presents the
structure,notedinChapter3,givenbythedifferencebetweenapositive
component, which depends on the data x, and a negative component,
which instead requires an ensemble average over all other possible sam-
ples x p(xθold). Similar relations can be written for the gradients
∼ |
with respect to a and b, namely
lnp(xθ) = E [z ] E [z ] (6.47)
∇
aj
|
|θ=θold zj∼p(zj|x,θold) j
−
zj∼p(zj|θold) j
and
lnp(xθ) = x E [x ]. (6.48)
∇
bi
|
|θ=θold i
−
xi∼p(xi|θold) i
In order to evaluate theexpectations in the negative components of
the gradients, one typically uses a an MC technique known as Markov
Chain MC (MCMC) to be discussed in Chapter 8. More specifically, a
simplified approach known as Contrastive Divergence (CD) has been
found to be an effective approximation. Accordingly, one “clamps” the
visible variables to the observed variables x = x, and generates the
sequence x z(0) x(1) z(1), using the conditional probability
→ → →
(6.45a) to generate z from x and (6.45b) to generate x from z. The
resulting samples are used to approximate the expectations as
(0) (1) (1)
lnp(xθ) x z x z , (6.49)
∇ wij | |θ=θold ≃ i j − i j
and similar expressions apply for the other gradients. The CD scheme
can also be generalized to CD-k by increasing the Markov chain se-
quence to k steps, and the using the resulting samples x(k) and z(k) in
lieu of x(1) and z(1).
Extensions and application of the RBM are discussed in [20, 153].
Generalizations of RBMs with multiple layers of hidden variables are
referredtoasDeepBoltzmannMachines.Wereferto[64]fordiscussion
about training and applications.
6.6. Discriminative Models 159
6.6 Discriminative Models
Whenthegoalislearningarepresentationzofdatax,onecantrytodi-
rectly learn a parametrized encoder, or discriminative model, p(z x,θ),
|
as illustrated in Fig. 6.1(c). With an encoder p(z x,θ), we can define
|
the joint distribution as p(x,z θ) = p(x)p(z x,θ), where p(x) is the
| |
true distribution of the data. The latter is in practice approximated
usingthe empirical distribution p (x) of the data. This yields the joint
D
distribution
p(x,z θ) = p (x)p(z x,θ). (6.50)
D
| |
From (6.50), itis observed that, unlikethefrequentist methodscon-
sidered up to now, discriminative models for unsupervised learning are
based on the definition of a single distribution over observed and un-
observed variables. As such, divergence measures, which involve two
distributions, are not relevant performance metrics. In contrast, a suit-
able metric is the mutual information between the jointly distributed
variables (x,z). The mutual information is a measure of the statistical
dependence between the two rvs and is introduced in Appendix A.
To elaborate, a typical learning criterion is the maximization of the
mutual information I (x;z) between the representation z and the
p(x,z|θ)
data x under the joint distribution p(x,z θ). Note that, for clarity, we
|
explicitly indicated the joint distribution used to evaluate the mutual
information as a subscript. It can be related to the KL divergence as
I (x;z) =KL(p(x,z θ) p(x)p(z)). Thisrelationshipindicates that
p(x,z|θ)
| ||
the mutual information quantifies the degree of statistical dependence,
or the distance from independence, for the two rvs.
The resulting Information Maximization problem is given as
max I (x;z). (6.51)
θ
pD(x)p(z|x,θ)
As seen, in order to avoid learning the trivial identity mapping, one
needstoimposesuitableconstraintsontheencoderp(z x,θ)inorderto
|
restrictitscapacity. Inordertotackleproblem(6.51),atypicalsolution
is to resort to an MM approach that is akin to the EM algorithm for
ML learning described above (see Fig. 6.4).
To this end, as for EM, we introduce a variational distribution
q(xz), and observe that we have the following lower bound on the
|
160 Unsupervised Learning
mutual information5
I (x;z) H(p (x))+E [lnq(x z)]. (6.52)
pD(x)p(z|x,θ)
≥
D x,z∼pD(x)p(z|x,θ)
|
Thisresult follows usingthe same steps as for theELBO. Theboundis
tightwhenthevariationaldistributionq(xz)equalstheexactposterior
|
p(xz,θ) = p (x)p(z x,θ)/( p (x)p(z x,θ)). Based on this inequal-
| D | x D |
ity, one can design an iterative optimization algorithm over the model
P
parameters and the variational distribution q(xz) (see, e.g., [3, 150]).
|
When the latter is constrained to lie in a parametrized family, the opti-
mization over the decoder q(xz) is an example of variational inference,
|
which will be discussed in Chapter 8. The optimization over the model
parameters can be simplified when the model has additional structure,
such as in the InfoMax ICA method [85].
Inference-based interpretation.∗ The mutual information can
be related to the error probability of inferring x given the representa-
tion z. This can be seen, e.g., by using Fano’s inequality [38, 3]. More
concretely, criterion (6.52) can be interpreted in terms of inference of x
given z by noting that its right-hand side can be written as the differ-
enceH(p (x)) (E [ lnq(x z)]).Infact,thesecondterm
D
−
x,z∼pD(x)p(z|x,θ)
− |
is the cross-entropy measure for the prediction of x given z by means
of the variational distribution q(xz). Therefore, by maximizing (6.52)
|
over θ, the model p(z x,θ) obtains a representation z such that the
|
predictor q(xz) ensures, on average, a good reconstruction of x given
|
z. This point is further elaborated on in [4]. We specifically point to [4,
Fig. 2], where a comparison with methods based on ML is provided.
Information bottleneck method.∗ An important variation of
the InfoMax principle yields the information bottleneck method. In the
latter, one assumes the presence of an additional variable y, jointly
distributed with x, which represents the desired information, but is
unobserved. The goal is, as above, to learn an encoder p(z x,θ) be-
|
tween the observed x and the representation z. However, here, this is
done by maximizing the mutual information I(y;z) between the tar-
get unobserved variable y and the representation z, in the presence of
a regularization term that aims at minimizing the complexity of the
5The bound is also used bythe Blahut-Arimoto algorithm [38].
6.7. Autoencoders 161
representation. This penalty term is given by the mutual information
I(x;z), which finds justification in rate-distortion arguments [145].
6.7 Autoencoders
As seen in Fig. 6.1, autoencoders include parametric models for both
encoderanddecoder.Wefocushereforbrevityondeterministicautoen-
coders,in which theencoder is definedby a functionz = F (x) and the
θ
decoder by a function x = G (z). Note that the parameters defining
θ
the two functions may be tied or may instead be distinct, and that
the notation is general enough to capture both cases. We will mention
at the end of this section probabilistic autoencoders, in which encoder
and decoder are defined by conditional probability distributions.
Autoencoders transform the unsupervised learning problem of ob-
taining a representation z = F (x) of the input x based solely on unla-
θ
belled examples x N into an instance of supervised learning. They
{ n }n=1
dosobyconcatenatingtheencoderz = F (x)withadecoderx= G (z),
θ θ
so as to obtain the input-output relationship t = G (F (x)). The key
θ θ
idea is to train this function by setting the target t to be equal to
the input x. As such, the machine learns to obtain an intermediate
representation z = F (x) that makes it possible to recover a suitable
θ
estimate t = G (z) x of x.
θ
≃
Toformalize theapproach,learningis typically formulated interms
of the ERM problem
N
min ℓ(x ,G (F (x ))), (6.53)
n θ θ n
θ
n=1
X
inwhich,asexplained,theencoder-decodermappingG (F ())istrained
θ θ
·
to reproduce the input at its output.
In the absence of constraints on encoder and decoder, the problem
above trivially returns an identify mapping, i.e., G (F (x)) = x. In
θ θ
order to potentially learn a useful model, one should hence impose
constraints, such as dimensionality or sparsity, on the latent vector z.
Some notable examples are discussed next.
PCA. PCA assumes linear encoder and decoder, and ties their
weight matrices via a transposition. Specifically, PCA sets the encoder
162 Unsupervised Learning
as F (x) = WTx and the decoder as G (z) = Wz. The parameters θ
θ θ
are hence given by the D M matrix W. By these definitions, the M
×
columns of W have the interpretation of linear features as for PPCA.
With a quadratic loss function, the learning problem (6.53) is given
as
N
min x WWTx 2. (6.54)
n n
W k − k
n=1
X
This problem can be solved in closed form. The solution is in fact
given by the M principal eigenvectors of the sample covariance matrix
N−1 N x xT. Extensions of PCAthat use the kernel trick (Chapter
n=1 n n
4) can be also devised (see, e.g., [104]). Furthermore, PCA can be seen
P
to be a special case of PPCA by setting in the latter µ = 0 and by
taking the limit σ2 0.
→
Dictionary learning. Indictionary learning, thedecoder is linear,
i.e., G (z) = Wz, as for PCA. However, the encoder is limited only
θ
by constraints on the set of feasible latent variables z. A typical such
constraint is sparsity: the latent vector should have a small number of
non-zero elements. Defining as the set of feasible values for z, the
C
dictionary learning problem can be formulated as
N
1
min x Wz 2. (6.55)
n n
W,{zn}∈CN
n=1
k − k
X
The name of the method accounts for the fact that matrix W can be
thought of as the dictionary of M features – its columns – that are
used to describe the data. The problem above is typically solved using
alternate optimization. Accordingly, one optimizes over W for a fixed
set of latent vectors z , which is a standard least squares problem;
n
{ }
and the optimizes over each latent vector z for a fixed W. The second
n
problemcanbetackledbyusingstandardsparsity-basedmethods,such
as LASSO (Chapter 2).
Multi-layer autoencoders.∗ Onecanalsorepresentbothencoder
and decoder as multi-layer neural networks. In this case, the weights
of encoder and decoders are typically tied to be the transpose of one
another, in a manner similar to PCA. Training is often done first layer-
by-layer,e.g.,usingRBMtraining,andthenviabackpropagationacross
the entire network [64].
6.8. Ranking∗ 163
Denoising autoencoders.∗ An alternative approach to facilitate
the learning of useful features is that taken by denoising autoencoders
[150]. Denoising autoencoders add noise to each input x , obtaining
n
a noisy version x˜ , and to then train the machine with the aim of
n
recovering the inputx from its noisy version x˜ . Formally, this can be
n n
done by minimizing the empirical risk N ℓ(x ,G (F (x˜ ))).
n=1 n θ θ n
Probabilistic autoencoders.∗ Instead of using deterministic en-
P
coder and decoder, it is possible to work with probabilistic encoders
and decoders, namely p(z x,θ) and p(xz,θ), respectively. Treating the
| |
decoder as a variational distribution, learning can then be done by a
variant of the EM algorithm. The resulting algorithm, known as Vari-
ational AutoEncoder (VAE), will be mentioned in Chapter 8.
∗
6.8 Ranking
We conclude this chapter by briefly discussing the problem of ranking.
When one has available ranked examples, ranking can be formulated
as a supervised learning problem [133]. Here, we focus instead on the
problem of ranking a set of webpages based only on the knowledge of
their underlying graph of mutual hyperlinks. This set-up may be con-
sidered as a special instance of unsupervised learning. We specifically
describe a representative, popular, scheme known as PageRank [110],
which uses solely the web of hyperlinks as a form of supervision signal
to guide the ranking.
Toelaborate,wedefinetheconnectivity graphbyincludingavertex
for each webpage and writing the adjacent matrix as
1 if page j links to page i
L = . (6.56)
ij
0 otherwise

The outgoing degree of a webpage is hence given as

C = L . (6.57)
j ij
i
X
PageRank computes the rank p of a webpage i as
i
L
ij
p = (1 d)+d p , (6.58)
i j
− C
j
j6=i
X
164 Unsupervised Learning
where0 < d < 1isaparameter.Hence,therankofapageisaweighted
sum of a generic rank of equal to 1, which enables the choice of new
pages, and of an aggregate “vote” from other pages. The latter term
is such that any other page j votes for page i if it links to page i and
its vote equals its own rank divided by the total number of outgoing
links, that is, p /C . In essence, a page i is highly ranked if it is linked
j j
by pages with high rank. The equation (6.58) can be solved recursively
to obtain the ranks of all pages. A variation of PageRank that tailors
ranking to an individual’s preferences can be obtained as described in
[63].
6.9 Summary
Inthischapter,wehavereviewedthebasicsofunsupervisedlearning.A
common aspect of all considered approaches is the presence of hidden,
orlatent, variables thathelpexplain thestructureof thedata.We have
first reviewed ML learning via EM, and variations thereof, for directed
and undirected models. We have then introduced the GAN method
as a generalization of ML in which the KL divergence is replaced by
a divergence measure that is learned from the data. We have then
reviewed discriminative models, which may be trained via the InfoMax
principle, and autoencoders.
In the next section, we broaden the expressive power of the proba-
bilistic models considered so far by discussing the powerful framework
of probabilistic graphical models.
Part IV
Advanced Modelling and
Inference
7
Probabilistic Graphical Models
As we have seen in the previous chapters, probabilistic models are
widely used in machine learning. Using Fig. 6.1 as an example, we
have encountered both directed and undirected models, which have
been used to carry out supervised and unsupervised learning tasks.
Graphical models encode structural information about the rvs of inter-
est, both observed and latent. They hence provide a principled way to
define parametric probabilistic models with desired features.
The selection of a probabilistic graphical model hence follows the
same general rules that have been discussed so far: A more specialized,
or structured, model may help reduce overfitting, and hence the gener-
alization gap. This is done, as we will see, by reducing the number of
parameters to be learned. On the flip side, specialization may come at
the cost of an irrecoverable bias.
In this chapter, we provide an introduction to the vast field prob-
abilistic graphical models, which is a powerful framework that allows
us to represent and learn structured probabilistic models. The goal
here is to introduce the main concepts and tools, while referring to the
extensive treatments in [81, 15, 104, 151] for additional information.
166
7.1. Introduction 167
7.1 Introduction
In this section, we start by discussing two examples that illustrate
the type of structural information that can be encoded by means of
probabilistic graphical models. We then provide an overview of this
chapter.
As illustrated by the two examples below, structured probabilistic
models can be used to set up parametric models for both supervised
andunsupervisedlearning.Intheformercase,allvariablesareobserved
in the training set, with some rvs being inputs, i.e., covariates (x), and
others being considered as outputs, or targets (t). In contrast, in the
latter case, some variables are unobserved and play the role of latent
variables (z) that help explain or generate the observed variables (x).1
Example 7.1. Consider the tasks of text classification via supervised
learning or text clustering via unsupervisedlearning. In the supervised
learning case, the problem is to classify documents depending on their
topic, e.g., sport, politics or entertainment, based on set of labelled
documents. With unsupervised learning, the problem is to cluster doc-
uments according to the similarity of their contents based on the sole
observation of the documents themselves.
A minimal model for this problem should include a variable t repre-
senting the topic and a variable x for the document. The topic can
be represented by a categorical variable taking T values, i.e.., t
∈
1,...,T ,whichisobservedforsupervisedlearningandlatentforunsu-
{ }
pervised learning. As for the document, with “bag-of-words” encoding,
a set of W words of interest is selected, and a document is encoded as
a W 1 binary vector x = [x ,...,x ]T, in which x = 1 if word w is
1 W w
×
contained in the document.2
Tostart,wecouldtrytouseanunstructureddirectedmodeldefined
as
t Cat(π) (7.1a)
∼
x t = t Cat(π ), (7.1b)
t
| ∼
1Strictly speaking, this distinction applies to the frequentist approach, since in
theBayesian approach themodelparameters arealways treatedasunobservedrvs.
2Note that W here does not represent a matrix of weights!
168 Probabilistic Graphical Models
wherethe parameter vector includes the T 1 probability vector π and
×
the T probability vectors π , one for each class, each of dimension 2W.
t
Note, in fact, that the vector x can take 2W possible values. As such,
thismodelwouldrequiretolearn(T 1)+T(2W 1)parameters,which
− −
quickly becomes impractical when the number W of words of interest
is large enough. Furthermore, as we have seen, a learned model with
a large number of parameters is bound to suffer from overfitting if the
available data is relatively limited.
Insteadofusingthisunstructuredmodel,wecanadoptamodelthat
encodes some additional assumptions that can be reasonably made on
the data. Here is one possible such assumption: once the topic is fixed,
the presence of a word is independent on the presence of other words.
The resulting model is known as Bernoulli naive Bayes, and can be
described as follows
t Cat(π) (7.2a)
∼
W
x t = t Bern(x π ), (7.2b)
w w|t
| ∼ |
w=1
Y
with parameter vector including the T 1 probability vector π and T
×
sets of W probabilities π , w = 1,...,W, for each topic t. Parameter
w|t
π represents the probability of word w occurring in a document of
w|t
topic t. The mentioned independence assumption hence allowed us to
bring the number of parameters down to (T 1)+TW, which corre-
−
sponds to an exponential reduction.
Figure 7.1: BN for the naive Bayes model using the plate notation. Learnable
parameters are represented as dots.
The naive Bayes model can be represented graphically by the BN
7.1. Introduction 169
illustrated in Fig. 7.1, where we have considered N i.i.d. documents.
Note that the graph is directed: in this problem, it is sensible to model
the document as being caused by the topic, entailing a directed causal-
ity relationship.Learnableparameters arerepresented asdots.BNs are
covered in Sec. 7.2.
Figure 7.2: MRF for the image denoising example. Only one image is shown and
thelearnable parameters are not indicated in orderto simplify theillustration.
Example 7.2. The second example concerns image denoising using su-
pervised learning. For this task, we wish to learn a joint distribution
p(x,z θ) of the noisy image x and of the corresponding desired noise-
|
less image z. We encode the images using a matrix representing the
numerical values of the pixels. A structured model in this problem can
accountforthefollowingreasonableassumptions:(i)neighboringpixels
of the noiseless image are correlated, while pixels further apart are not
directly dependent on one another; and (ii) noise acts independently
on each pixel of the noiseless image to generate the noisy image. These
assumptions are encoded by the MRF shown in Fig. 7.2. Note that this
is an undirected model. This choice is justified by the need to capture
the mutual correlation among neighboring pixels, which cannot be de-
scribedas a directed causality relationship. We will studyMRFs in Sec.
7.3.
Assuggested bytheexamplesabove,structureinprobabilisticmod-
els can be conveniently represented in the form of graphs. At a fun-
damental level, structural properties in a probabilistic model amount
170 Probabilistic Graphical Models
to conditional independence assumptions. For instance, in the naive
Bayes model, the word indicators are conditionally independent given
the topic. As we will see in the rest of this chapter, conditional in-
dependence assumptions translate into factorizations of the joint dis-
tributions of the variables under study. Factorizations, and associated
conditionalindependenceproperties,canberepresentedbythreediffer-
ent graphical frameworks, namely BNs, MRFs and factor graphs. For
brevity, this chapter will only focus on the first two.
7.2 Bayesian Networks
This section provides a brief introduction to BNs by focusing on key
definitionsand onthe problemof ML learningwith somenote onMAP
and Bayesian viewpoints.
7.2.1 Definitions and Basics
BNs encode a probability factorization or, equivalently, a set of condi-
tional independence relationships through a directed graph. The start-
ing point is the chain rule for probabilities for a generic set of K rvs
x ,...,x :
1 K
{ }
p(x ,...,x ) = p(x )p(x x )...p(x x ,...,x ),
1 k 1 2 1 K 1 K−1
| |
K
= p(x x ,...,x ), (7.3)
k 1 k−1
|
k=1
Y
where the order of the variables is arbitrary. The factorization (7.3)
applies for a generic joint distribution, and it does not encode any
additionalstructuralinformation.Notethatthenotationhereisgeneral
and not meant to indicate that the variables are necessary observed.
Example 7.3. Consider again the naive Bayes model for text classifi-
cation/ clustering. There, we imposed the structural constraint that
word indicator variables x W be conditionally independent given
{ w }w=1
thetopict.Thisconditionalindependenceassumptioncanbeexpressed
using the “perp” notation
x x t, (7.4)
w w′ w′6=w
⊥ { } |
7.2. Bayesian Networks 171
or the Markov chain notation
x t x . (7.5)
w w′ w′6=w
− −{ }
Mathematically, this condition means that we have p(x t, x ) =
w w′
| { }
p(x t),where x isanysubsetofthevariables x .Applying
w w′ w′ w′6=w
| { } { }
the chain rule to the rvs ( x W ,t) using order t,x ,...,x (or any
{ w }w=1 1 W
other order on the x W variables), we can hence write
{ w }w=1
W
p(x,t) = p(t) p(x t). (7.6)
w
|
w=1
Y
This factorization is represented by the BN in Fig. 7.1. In the di-
rected graph shown in the figure, each vertex corresponds to a rv, and
a directed edge is included from t to each variable x . This edge cap-
w
turesthefactthattheconditionalprobabilityofthevariablex in(7.6)
w
is conditioned on rv t. Informally, t “causes” all variables in vector x.
Thegraphaccountsformultiplei.i.d.realization(x ,t ) = x ,t N ,
D D { n n }n=1
where we denote the nth sample as x = [x x ]T. The joint dis-
n 1n Wn
···
tribution factorizes as
N W
p(x ,t ) = p(t ) p(x t ). (7.7)
D D n wn n
|
n=1 w=1
Y Y
The BN uses the tile notation that will be formalized below to indicate
multiple independent realizations of rvs with the same distribution.
Generalizing the example above, we define BNs as follows.
Definition 7.1. A BN is a directed acyclic graph (DAG)3, whose ver-
tices represent rvs x ,....,x with an associated joint distribution
1 K
{ }
that factorizes as
K
p(x ,...,x ) = p(x x ) (7.8)
1 K k P(k)
|
k=1
Y
where (k) denotes the set of parents of node k in the DAG. In a BN,
P
rvs are represented by full circles, while learnable parameters defining
the conditional distributions are represented by dots.
3In a DAG, there are no directed cycles, that is, no closed paths following the
direction of the arrows.
172 Probabilistic Graphical Models
As per the definition, the parents x of a rv x in the DAG
P(k) k
account for the statistical dependence of x with all the preceding vari-
k
ables x ,...,x according to the selected order. That is, the BN en-
1 k−1
codes the local conditional independence relationships
x x ,...,x x (7.9)
k 1 k−1 P(k)
⊥ { }|
using the “perp” notation, or equivalently x x x ,...,x
k P(k) 1 k−1
− − { }
using the Markov chain notation, for k = 1,...,K. As seen in Fig. 7.1,
plates are used to represent independentreplicas of a part of the graph.
When to use BNs.BNsaresuitablemodelswhenonecanidentify
causality relationships among the variables. In such cases, there exists
a natural order on the variables, such that rvs that appear later in the
order are caused by a subset of the preceding variables. The causing
rvs for each rv x are included in the parent set (k), and are such
k
P
that, when conditioning on rvs x , rv x is independent on all other
P(k) k
preceding rvs x ,...,x . BNs also underlie the framework of inter-
1 k−1
{ }
ventions that allows the assessment of causality, as opposed to mere
correlation, among observed variables, as briefly discussed in Sec. 2.7
[113].
Sampling from a BN. The causality relationship among the or-
dered variables x ,...,x encoded by a BN makes it easy, at least
1 K
{ }
in principle, to draw samples from a BN. This can be done by using
ancestral sampling: Generate rv x p(x ); then, x p(x x ); and
1 1 2 2 P(2)
∼ ∼ |
so on, with rv x being generated as x p(x x ).
k k k P(k)
∼ |
Example 7.4. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are used to study time
series, or more generally sequential data, measured through a memo-
ryless transformation, such as an additive noise channel. Mathemati-
cally, HMMs can be represented by two sets of variables: the underly-
ing sequence z ,z ,...,z , and the measured “noisy” data x ,x ,...,x .
1 2 D 1 2 D
HMMsencodetwoassumptions:(i)each samplez dependsonthepast
i
samples only through theprevious sample z ; and(ii) each measured
i−1
data x depends only on z . Assumption (i) makes process z ,z ,... a
i i 1 2
Markov chain.
Using the order z ,x ,z ,x ,..., we can write the joint distribution
1 1 2 2
7.2. Bayesian Networks 173
as
D
p(x,z) = p(z )p(x z ) p(z z )p(x z ) (7.10)
1 1 1 i i−1 i i
| | |
i=1
Y
byenforcingthelocalindependenciesz z z ,...,z ,x ,...,x
i i−1 1 i−2 1 i−2
− −{ }
and x z z ,...,z ,x ,...,x . This factorization is represented
i i 1 i−1 1 i−1
− −{ }
by the BN in Fig. 7.3. While not indicated in the figure for clarity, an
important aspect of HMMs is that the learnable parameters defining
the transitions probabilities p(z z ) and the transformations p(x z )
i i−1 i i
| |
are respectively imposed to be equal, or tied, for all i, hence reducing
the number of parameters to be leaned.
Among the many relevant examples of applications of HMMs (see
[81, 104, 15, 117]), we mention here text autocorrection, in which the
underlying sequential data z ,z ,... amount to the correct text while
1 2
the measured data x ,x ,... to the typed text; and speech recognition,
1 2
in which the underlying time series z ,z ,... is a sequence of words and
1 2
thetransformationtothemeasuredrecordedspeechx ,x ,...translates
1 2
words into sounds.
Figure 7.3: BN representing an HMM. The lernable parameters are not explicitly
indicated.
In supervised learning applications, both sequences are observed in
the training data, with the goal of learning to predict the sequence
z ,z ,..., for new measured data points x ,x ,... via to the trained
1 2 1 2
model. This task, in this context, is also known as denoising, since
x ,x ,... can be thought of as a noisy version of z ,z ,... With unsu-
1 2 1 2
pervised learning, only the sequence x ,x ,... is observed.
1 2
Example 7.5. This example demonstrates how easily Bayesian mod-
elling can be incorporated in a BN. To this end, consider again the
174 Probabilistic Graphical Models
BernoullinaiveBayesmodel(7.2)fortextclassification.TakingaBayesian
viewpoint, parameters π and π are to beconsidered as rvs.We fur-
w|t
{ }
ther assume them to be a priori independent, which is known as the
global independence assumption. As a result, the joint probability dis-
tribution for each document factorizes as
T W
p(x,t,π,π α,a,b) = Dir(π α) Beta(π a,b)
w|t w|t
| | |
t=1w=1
Y Y
W
Cat(t π) Bern(x π ). (7.11)
w w|t
× | |
w=1
Y
In the factorization above, we have made the standard assumption
of a Dirichlet prior for the probability vector π and a Beta prior for
parameters π , as discussed in Chapter 3. The quantities α,a,b
w|t
{ }
are hyperparameters. Note that the hyperparameters (a,b) are shared
for all variables π in this example. The corresponding BN is shown
w|t
in Fig. 7.4, which can be compared to Fig. 7.1 for the corresponding
frequentist model.
Figure 7.4: BN for the Bayesian version of the naive Bayes model (7.11). Hyper-
parameters are not indicated and tiles indices are marked without their ranges for
clarity.
We invite the reader to consider also the Latent Dirichlet Alloca-
tion (LDA) model and the other examples available in the mentioned
textbooks.
7.2. Bayesian Networks 175
7.2.2 Global Conditional Independence
As we have discussed, BNs are defined by local conditional indepen-
dence properties that are encoded in the factorization of a joint dis-
tribution and in the supporting DAG. BNs can also be used to assess
generic global conditional independence queries of the type: Is a given
subset of variables independent of another set conditioned on a
A B
third subset of variables? The d-separation algorithm outputs either
C
a positive response or a “maybe” answer to this question. It is briefly
described as follows:
Build a subgraph ′ from the original DAG by keeping all ver-
• G
tices in the subsets , B and , as well as all the edges and vertices
A C
encountered by moving backwards on theDAG one or moreedges from
the vertices in , B and ;
A C
Build a subgraph ′′ from ′ by deleting all edges coming out of
• G G
the vertices in ;
C
Iftherenopath,neglectingthedirectionalityoftheedges,between
•
anodein andanodein ,thentheconditionalindependencerelation
A B
holds. Else, if one such path exists, then there is at least one
A ⊥ B|C
joint distribution that factorizes as for the given DAG for which the
condition does not hold.
A ⊥ B|C
Example 7.6. Consider the so-called V-structure x y z. Using d-
→ ←
separation, it can be seen that the conditional independence x y z
− −
does not hold in general.
7.2.3 Learning
Assume that the DAG of a BN is given. Structure learning, that is,
the decision of which edges should be included in the graph based
on available training data, is also an important problem that will not
be considered here. Making explicit the dependence of the probability
factors on learnable parameters µ, the joint distribution encoded by a
BN can be written as
K
p(x ,...,x ) = p(x x ,µ ), (7.12)
1 K k P(k) k|x
| P(k)
k=1
Y
176 Probabilistic Graphical Models
where µ are the parameters defining the conditional distribu-
k|x
P(k)
tion p(x x ). Note that the parameters µ are generally dif-
k P(k) k|x
| P(k)
ferent for different values of k and of the parents’ variables x (see,
P(k)
e.g., (7.11)). In most cases of interest, the probability distribution
p(x x ,µ )is intheexponentialfamily or is aGLM(see Chap-
k P(k) k|x
| P(k)
ter 3).
As we have already seen in previous examples, the parameters
µ can either be separate, that is, distinct for each k and each
k|x
P(k)
value of x , or they can be tied. In the latter case, some of the pa-
P(k)
rameters µ are constrained to be equal across different values of
k|x
P(k)
x and/or across different values of k. As a special case of tied pa-
P(k)
rameters, the value of µ may also be independent of x , such
k|x P(k)
P(k)
as in the case for GLMs.
As for the data, we have seen that the rvs x ,...,x can be either
1 K
fully observed in the training set, as in supervisedlearning, or they can
be partially observed as in unsupervised learning.
Forthesakeofbrevity,herewedescribelearningonlyforthecaseof
fully observed data with separate parameters, and we briefly mention
extensions to the other cases.
Fully Observed Data with Separate Parameters
We are given a fully observed data set = x N , with each data
D { n }n=1
point written as x = [x ,...,x ]T. For concreteness, assume that
n 1n Kn
all variables are categorical. Denoting as x the parents of variable
P(k)n
x , the LL function can be factorized as:
kn
N K
lnp( µ)= lnp(x x ,µ ) (7.13a)
kn P(k)n k|x
D| | P(k)n
n=1k=1
X X
K N
= lnp(x x ,µ ) (7.13b)
kn P(k)n k|x
| P(k)n
k=1n=1
X X
K
= lnp(x x ,µ ), (7.13c)
kn P(k) k|x
| P(k)
k X =1x XP(k)n∈N XxP(k)
7.2. Bayesian Networks 177
where we have defined the set of indices
= n : x = x . (7.14)
N x P(k) { P(k)n P(k) }
This set includes the indices n for which the parents x of node k
P(k)n
take a specificvector of values x . In (7.13c), the inner sum depends
P(k)
only on the parameters µ corresponding to the given value x
k|x P(k)
P(k)
of the rvs x for n = 1,...,N. Therefore, in the case of separate
P(k)n
parameters,theMLestimate foreach parameterµ can becarried
k|x
P(k)
out independently. While this simplifies the problem, it may also cause
overfitting issues owing to the problem of data fragmentation, as each
parameter is estimated based only on a fraction of the data set.
As an even more concrete example, consider binary variables mod-
elled as x Bern(µ ). Accordingly, the probability of each rv
k k|x
∼ P(k)
depends on the value x of the parents. For this case, we can write
P(k)
the ML estimate as
x
µˆ =
n∈NxP(k) kn
. (7.15)
k|x ,ML
P(k) P
x
N P(k)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Figure 7.5: BN for Example 7.7.
Example 7.7. Consider the BN shown in Fig. 7.5 with binary rvs in
178 Probabilistic Graphical Models
the alphabet 0,1 . The observed data is given as
{ } D
1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0
 


0
1

,

1
1

,

1
0

,

0
0

,

0
0

,

1
0

,

1
1

,

0
1

 ,
               
               
wh
e|re{ 1
t
0
zhe}b|ott{
1
o
4
zm}ro|w{i
8
znd}ica|te{
1
s
2
zth}e|nu{m
1
zbe}r|of{o
2
zbs}er|vat{
1
izon}se|qu{
2
azlt}o
the
vector above it. The ML estimates are: µ = 10+8+1+1 = 20 = 2,
1,ML 50 50 5
µ = 14+8+2+1 = 1, µˆ = 2 = 1, µˆ = 1 = 1, µˆ =
2,ML 50 2 3|00 12+2 7 3|11 8+1 9 3|01
14 = 7 and µˆ = 10 = 10.
14+2 8 3|10 10+1 11
MAP estimates can be seen to decompose in a similar way un-
der global independence assumptions on the parameters, and the same
holds for Bayesian approach [81].
Notes on the General Case
With shared parameters, obtaining ML and MAP estimates require
aggregating statistics across all variables that share the same parame-
ters. The Bayesian approach is more complex, and we refer to [81] for
discussion. An alternative approach with “soft sharing” is the hierar-
chical Bayes model (see [81, Fig. 17.11]). In the presence of missing
data, learning typically involves the EM algorithm described in Chap-
ter6orapproximatelearningcounterpartstobeintroducedinthenext
chapter.
7.3 Markov Random Fields
In this section, we turn to MRF by following the same approach as for
BNs in the previous section.
7.3.1 Definitions and Basics
As BNs, MRFs encode a probability factorization or, equivalently, a
set of conditional independence relationships. They do so, however,
through an undirected graph.
7.3. Markov Random Fields 179
Definition 7.2. A MRF is an undirected graph, whose vertices repre-
sent rvs with associated joint distribution that factorizes as
1
p(x) = ψ (x ), (7.16)
c c
Z
c
Y
where c is the index of a clique4 in the graph; x is the set of rvs
c
associated with the vertices in clique c; ψ (x ) 0 is the factor or
c c
≥
potential for clique c; and Z = ψ (x ) is the partition function.
c c
x c
With no loss of generality, the sumPQcan be limited to maximal cliques
(i.e., cliques that are not fully included in a larger clique). In a MRF,
rvs are represented by full circles, while learnable parameters defining
the conditional distributions are represented by dots.
Each factor ψ (x ) in (7.16) encodes the compatibility of the values
c c
x in each clique, with larger values of ψ (x ) corresponding to con-
c c c
figurations x that are more likely to occur. Factors are generally not
c
probability distributions, i.e., they are not normalized to sum or inte-
grate to one.Furthermore,unlike BNs,each factor does notdistinguish
between conditioning and conditioned rvs. Rather, all variables in the
clique x can play the same role in defining the value of the potential
c
ψ (x ).
c c
Whento use MRFs.ThisdiscussionpointstothefactthatMRFs
areespeciallywellsuitedtomodelmutualrelationshipsofcompatibility,
or lack thereof, among variables, rather than causality effects.
Evaluating Probabilities and Sampling from an MRF. This
distinguishingfeatureofMRF,whichbringspotentialmodellingadvan-
tagesinsomeapplications,comeswiththeaddeddifficultyofevaluating
the joint probability distribution and sampling from the joint distribu-
tion. In fact, the computation of the probability (7.16) requires the
calculation of the partition function Z, which is generally intractable
when the alphabet of the vector x is large enough. This is typically not
thecaseforBNs,inwhicheachconditionalprobabilityisconventionally
selected from a known (normalized) distribution. Furthermore, unlike
BNs, MRFs do not allow ancestral sampling, as all the conditional dis-
4A cliqueis a fully connected subgraph.
180 Probabilistic Graphical Models
tributions of the individual rvs in x are generally tied together via the
partition function.
Example 7.8. Theimagedenoisingexampledescribedatthebeginning
ofthischapter leverages theMRFinFig.7.2.Init,themaximalcliques
are given by the pairs of rvs {z ,z } and x ,z that are connected by
i j i i
{ }
an edge. Associating a factor or potential to each clique yields the
factorized joint distribution
1
p(x,z) = ψ (z ,z ) ψ (z ,x ), (7.17)
i,j i j i i i
Z ·
{Yi,j} Y i
where i,j represents an edge of the undirected graph. As a notable
{ }
example, in the Ising model, the variables are bipolar, i.e., z ,x
i i
∈
1,+1},andthepotentialsaredefinedasψ (z ,z η ) = exp( E(z ,z η ))
ij i j 1 i j 1
{− | − |
and ψ (z ,x η ) = exp( E(z ,x η )), with energy functions
i i i 2 i i 2
| − |
E(z ,z η )= η z z and E(z ,x η) = η z x . (7.18)
i j 1 1 i j i i 2 i i
| − | −
From this definition, a large natural parameter η > 0 yields a large
1
probability – or a low energy – when z and z are equal; and, similarly,
i j
a large η > 0 favors configurations in which z = x , that is, with low
2 i i
noise.
Example 7.9. Another related example is given by the RBMs studied
in Sec. 6.5.1, whose undirected graph is shown in Fig. 6.6.
As illustrated by the previous examples, potentials are typically
parameterized using the energy-based form
ψ (x ) = exp( E (x η )), (7.19)
c c c c c
− |
withparametervectorη .Thisformensuresthatthefactorsarestrictly
c
positive as long as the energy is upperbounded.A special class of such
models is given by log-linear models, such as the Ising model, in which,
as seen in Chapter 3, the energy is a linear function of the parameters.
7.3.2 Global Conditional Independence
MRF,in amannersimilar to BNs,enabletheassessmentof conditional
independence properties globally in the graph. The procedure is, in
7.3. Markov Random Fields 181
fact, easier with MRFs thanks to the Hammersley–Clifford theorem.
The latter says that, if the potentials ψ (x ) are strictly positive for
c c
all cliques c, as for the energy-based potentials (7.19), the conditional
independence relationship can be tested via the following
A ⊥ B|C
simple algorithm.
Eliminate all variables in and all the connected edges;
• C
If there is no path between rvs in and , then the relationship
• A B
holds;if,instead,thereisapath,thenthereexists atleast one
A ⊥ B|C
joint distribution that factorizes as for the undirected graph at hand
for which the relationship does not hold.
A ⊥ B|C
7.3.3 Learning
Learning in MRFs is made complicated by the partition function. In
fact, the partition function couples together all the parameters. This
makes it impossible to carry out separately the estimate of the param-
eters η associated with each clique even in the fully observed case
c
with separate parameters. Nevertheless, MRFs with energy-based po-
tentials (7.19) fall either in the exponential family, when the factors
are log-normal, or in the more general class of energy-based models. In
bothcases,gradient-based algorithms can bedevisedby usingmethods
similar to those used in Sec. 6.5.1 for RBMs.
7.3.4 Converting BNs to MRFs
As suggested by the discussion above, BNs and MRFs are suitable to
encode different types of statistical dependencies, with the former cap-
turing causality while the latter accounting for mutual compatibility.
There are in fact conditional independence properties that can be ex-
pressedby BNor MRFbutnotbyboth.Anexampleis theV-structure
x y z discussed in Example 7.6, whose independencies cannot be
→ ←
captured by an MRF.
That said, given a BN with factorization (7.8), we can definepoten-
tial functions
ψ (x ,x ) = p(x x ) (7.20)
k k P(k) k P(k)
|
182 Probabilistic Graphical Models
to obtain the factorization
K
p(x) = ψ (x ,x ) (7.21)
k k P(k)
k=1
Y
with partition function Z = 1. This factorization defines an MRF in
which each maximal clique contains a rv x and its parents x . The
k P(k)
correspondingundirectedgraphcanbedirectlyobtainedfromtheDAG
that defines the BN via the following two steps:
Connect all pairs of parents by an undirected edge – this step is
•
known as “moralization”;
Make all edges undirected.
•
As per the discussion above, the resulting MRF may not account
for all the independencies encoded in the original graph. This can be
easily seen by applying the procedure to the V-structure.
7.4 Bayesian Inference in Probabilistic Graphical Models
Bayesian inference amounts to the computation of the posterior prob-
ability of unobserved, or latent, variables given observed variables. In
this regard, it is useful to differentiate between intensive and extensive
latent variables. Intensive latent variables are model parameters whose
number does not increase with the number N of data points, such as
the probability vectors (π, π ) in the Bernoulli naive Bayes model.
w|t
{ }
Extensivelatentvariables areinsteadrvsindexedbytheexampleindex
n, whose number grows with the sample size N. These correspond to
the latent variables z introduced in the previous chapter.
n
Bayesian inference is a fundamental task that lies at the heart of
both inference and learning problems. As seen in Chapter 2, it un-
derlies supervised learning for generative probabilistic models, which
requires the computation of the predictive probability p(t x,θ) for the
|
new sample (x,t) from the learned model p(x,t|θ). It is also at the core
of Bayesian supervised learning, which evaluates the posterior p(θ )
|D
of the parameter vector θ (an intensive variable) in order to obtain the
predictive posterior p(t x, ) = p(θ )p(t x,θ)dθ for the new sam-
| D |D |
ple (x,t). As studied in Chapter 6, Bayesian inference is a key step
R
in unsupervised learning even under a frequentist viewpoint, since the
7.4. Bayesian Inference in Probabilistic Graphical Models 183
EMalgorithm requirestheevaluation of theposteriorp(z x ,θ)of the
n n
|
latent (extensive) variables z given the current iterate θ.
n
{ }
As discussed, when performing Bayesian inference, we can distin-
guish between observed variables, say x, and latent variables z. In gen-
eral,onlyasubsetoflatentvariablesmaybeofinterest,sayz ,withthe
i
rest of the rvs in z being denoted as z . The quantity to be computed
−i
is the posterior distribution
p(x,z )
i
p(z x) = , (7.22)
i
| p(x)
where
p(x,z ) = p(x,z) (7.23)
i
X
z−i
and
p(x) = p(x,z ), (7.24)
i
X
zi
with the sum being replaced by an integral for continuous variables.
The key complication in evaluating these expressions is the need to
sum over potentially large sets, namely the domains of variables z
−i
and z . Note that the sum in (7.23), which appears at the numerator of
i
(7.22), is over all hidden variables that are of no interest. In contrast,
the sum in (7.24), which is at the denominator of (7.22), is over the
variables whose posterior probability (7.22) is the final objective of the
calculation.
The complexity of the steps (7.23) and (7.24) is exponential in the
respective numbers of latent variables over which the sums are com-
puted, and hence it can be prohibitive.
Example 7.10. ConsideranHMM,whoseBNisshowninFig.7.3.Hav-
ing learned the probabilistic model, a typical problem is that of infer-
ringagivenhiddenvariablez giventheobservedvariablesx = x ,....,x .
i { 1 D }
Computing the posterior p(z x) requires the evaluation of the sums in
i
|
(7.23)and(7.24).Whenthehiddenvariablesz ,...,z arediscretewith
1 D
alphabet size , the complexity of step (7.23) is of the order D−1,
Z |Z|
since one needs to sum over the D−1 possible values of the hidden
|Z|
variables.
184 Probabilistic Graphical Models
The structure encoded by probabilistic graphic models can help
reducethediscussed complexity of Bayesian inference. Therefore,prob-
abilistic graphical models can not only enhance learning by controlling
the capacity of the model, but also enable Bayesian inference. To elab-
orate, consider a joint distributions defined by an MRF as in (7.16).
Notethat,aswehaveseeninSec.7.3.4,onecaneasily convertBNsinto
MRFs, although possibly at the cost of not preserving some linear in-
dependence relationship. With this factorization, the marginalizations
(7.23)-(7.24) require solving the so-called sum-product inference task
ψ (x ), (7.25)
c c
z c
XY
where the variables z are a subset of the variables in x.
As an important observation, formulation (7.25) highlights the fact
that the problem of computing the partition function Z for MRFs is
a special case of the sum-product inference task. In fact, in order to
compute Z, the sum in (7.25) is carried out over all variables in x.
When the undirected graph describing the joint distribution is a
tree5, the complexity of sum-product inference becomes exponential
only in themaximum numberof variables in each factor, also known as
treewidth of the graph. In this case, the sum-productinference problem
can be exactly solved via message passing belief propagation over the
factor graph associated to the MRF. We refer to the textbooks [81, 15,
104] for details on factor graphs and belief propagation.
Example 7.11. The MRF associated with an HMM is obtained from
theBN in Fig. 7.3 by simply substitutingdirected for undirected edges,
and the distribution (7.10) factorizes as
D
p(x,z) = ψ(z )ψ(x ,z ) ψ(z ,z )ψ(x ,z ). (7.26)
1 1 1 i i−1 i i
i=1
Y
The undirected graph is a tree with treewidth equal to 2, since, as per
(7.26), there are at most two variables in each clique. Therefore, belief
propagation allows to evaluate the posteriors p(z x) with a complexity
i
|
of the order 2, which does not scale exponentially with the number
|Z|
D of time samples.
5In a tree, thereis only one path between any pairs of nodes (no loops).
7.5. Summary 185
When the undirected graph is not a tree, one can use the junction
tree algorithm forexactBayesian inference.Theideaistogroupsubsets
ofvariablestogether incliques,insuchawaythattheresultinggraphis
atree. Thecomplexity dependson thetreewidth of theresultinggraph.
Whenthiscomplexityistoohighforthegivenapplication,approximate
inferencemethodsarenecessary.Thisisthesubjectof thenextchapter.
7.5 Summary
Probabilistic graphical models encode a priori information about the
structure of the data in the form of causality relationships – via di-
rected graphs and BNs – or mutual affinities – via undirected graphs
andMRFs.Thisstructuretranslatesintoconditionalindependencecon-
ditions. The structural properties encoded by probabilistic graphical
models have the potential advantage of controlling the capacity of a
model,hencecontributingtothereductionofoverfittingattheexpense
of possible bias effects (see Chapter 5). They also facilitate Bayesian
inference (Chapters 2-4), at least in graphs with tree-like structures.
Probabilistic graphical models can be used as the underlying proba-
bilistic framework for supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised
learning problems, depending on which subsets of rvs are observed or
latent.
WhilegraphicalmodelscanreducethecomplexityofBayesian infer-
ence,thisgenerally remainscomputationally infeasibleformostmodels
of interest. To address this problem, the next chapter discusses ap-
proximate Bayesian inference, as well as associated learning problems
(Chapter 6).
8
Approximate Inference and Learning
InChapters 6and 7, we have seen thatlearning and inferencetasks are
often made difficult by the need to compute the posterior distribution
p(z x) of an unobserved variables z given an observed variables x. This
|
task requires the computation of the normalizing marginal
p(x) = p(x,z), (8.1)
z
X
wherethesumisreplaced byanintegral forcontinuousvariables.1 This
computation is intractable when the alphabet of the hidden variable z
is large enough. Chapter 7 has shown that the complexity of comput-
ing (8.1) can be alleviated in the special case in which the factorized
joint distribution p(x,z) is defined by specific classes of probabilistic
graphical models.
What to do when the complexity of computing (8.1) is excessive?
In this chapter, we provide a brief introduction to two popular ap-
proximate inference approaches, namely MC methods and Variational
Inference (VI). We also discuss their application to learning. As for the
1Note that this task subsumes (7.23) after appropriate redefinitions of thevari-
ables.
186
8.1. Monte Carlo Methods 187
previous chapter, the reader is referred to [81, 15, 104, 151] for details
and generalizations (see also [114]).
8.1 Monte Carlo Methods
To introduce MC methods, we start by observing that the expression
(8.1) can be rewritten as the ensemble average
p(x)= p(z)p(xz) = E [p(xz)] (8.2)
z∼p(z)
| |
z
X
over the latent rvs z p(z). The general idea behind MC methods is re-
∼
placing ensemble averages with empirical averages over randomly gen-
erated samples. In the most basic incarnation of MC, M i.i.d. samples
z p(z), m = 1,...,M, are generated from the marginal distribu-
m
∼
tion p(z) of the latent variables, and then the ensemble average (8.2)
is approximated by the empirical average
M
1
p(x) p(xz ). (8.3)
m
≃ M |
m=1
X
By the law of large numbers, we know that this estimate is consistent,
in the sense that it tends with probability one to the ensemble average
(8.2) when M is large. Furthermore, the error of the approximation
scales as 1/√M.
Example 8.1. ConsidertheIsingmodelforimagedenoisingintroduced
in Example 7.8. We recall that the joint distribution can be factorized
as
1
p(x,z) = ψ (z ,z ) ψ (z ,x ), (8.4)
i,j i j i i i
Z ·
{Yi,j} Y i
where i,j represents an edge of the undirected graph, with energy-
{ }
based potentials ψ (z ,z ) = exp(η z z ) and ψ (z ,x ) = exp(η z x ).
ij i j 1 i j i i i 2 i i
We have removed the dependence of the potentials on the (natural)
parameters η and η for simplicity of notation. In order to compute
1 2
the posterior p(z x), which may be used for image denoising, the MC
|
approach (8.3) requires to sample from the marginal p(z). This is, how-
ever, not easy given the impossibility to perform ancestral sampling
over MRFs as discussed in Sec. 7.3.
188 Approximate Inference and Learning
Importance Sampling. As seen in the previous example, the MC
procedureexplainedaboveisnotalways feasibleinpractice,sincedraw-
ing samples from the marginal p(z) may not be tractable. For instance,
the marginal p(z) may not be known or it may be difficult to draw
samples from it. Insuch common cases, one can instead resort to a sim-
plified distribution q(z) from which sampling is easy. This distribution
typically has convenient factorization properties that enable ancestral
sampling.
The starting observation is that the marginal distribution (8.1) can
be expressed as an ensemble average over a rv z q(z) as
∼
q(z)
p(x) = p(z)p(xz)
| q(z)
z
X
p(z)
= q(z) p(xz) (8.5)
q(z) |
z
X
p(z)
= E p(xz) ,
z∼q(z)
q(z) |
(cid:20) (cid:21)
as long as the support of distribution q(z) contains that of p(z). This
expression suggests thefollowing empirical estimate, which goes by the
name of Importance Sampling: Generate M i.i.d. samples z q(z),
m
∼
m = 1,...,M, and then compute the empirical approximation
M
1 p(z )
m
p(x) p(xz ). (8.6)
m
≃ M q(z ) |
m=1 m
X
This estimate is again consistent, but its variance depends on how well
q(z) approximates p(z). Note this approach requires knowledge of the
marginal p(z) but not the ability to sample from it.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) via Gibbs Sampling.
Ratherthandrawingsamplesfromadistributionthatmimicsp(z)inor-
dertocomputeanapproximationoftheposteriorp(z x) = p(x,z)/p(x),
|
MCMCmethodsaimatobtainingsamples z }directlyfromtheposte-
m
{
rior p(z x). With such samples, one can compute empirical approxima-
|
tions of any ensemble average with respect to p(z x). This is sufficient
|
to carry out most tasks of interest, including the expectation needed
to evaluate thepredictive posterior in Bayesian methods for supervised
learning or the average energy in the EM algorithm.
8.2. Variational Inference 189
MCMCmethodsgenerateasequenceofcorrelated samplesz ,z ,...
1 2
fromaneasy-to-sample Markov chain z z ...that hasthekey prop-
1 2
− −
erty of having the desired distribution p(z x) as the stationary distri-
|
bution. Such a Markov chain can be designed automatically once a BN
or MRF factorization of the joint distribution is available. To this end,
Gibbs sampling samples sequentially subsets of rvs. For each subset,
the sampling distribution is obtained by normalizing the product of all
factors including the rv being sampled (see, e.g., [81]).
The mechanical nature of this procedure makes it a universal, or
black-box, inference method, in the sense that it can be applied to
any typical probabilistic graphical modelin an automatic fashion. This
has led to the recent emergence of probabilistic programming, whereby
Bayesianinferenceisautomaticallyperformedbysoftwarelibrariesthat
are given as input a probabilistic graphical model for the joint distri-
bution (see, e.g., [41, 148]).
MC methods are often used in combination with VI, as discussed
in Sec. 8.3.
8.2 Variational Inference
The general idea behind VI is to replace the ensemble average in (8.2)
with a suitable optimization that returns an approximation of the pos-
terior distribution p(z x). Specifically, VI methods introduce an addi-
|
tional distribution on the hidden variables z that is optimized in order
to approximate the desired posterior p(z x).
|
I-projection. We start with the observation that the solution to
the optimization problem
min KL(q(z) p(z x)) (8.7)
q(z) || |
for a fixed value x, yields the unique solution q(z) = p(z x) if no con-
|
straints are imposed on q(z). This is due to Gibbs’ inequality (2.44).
This result is, by itself, not useful, since evaluating the KL divergence
KL(q(z) p(z x)) requires knowledge of p(z x), which is exactly what
|| | |
we are after.
190 Approximate Inference and Learning
However, the equality between (6.13) and (6.14), namely
KL(q(z) p(x,z)) = KL(q(z) p(z x)) lnp(x), (8.8)
|| || | −
demonstrates that problem (8.7) is equivalent to solving
min KL(q(z) p(x,z)), (8.9)
q(z) ||
where, by (6.11), we can write
KL(q(z) p(x,z)) = E [lnp(x,z)] H(q). (8.10)
z∼q(z)
|| − −
In words, solving problem (8.7) is equivalent to minimizing the varia-
tional free energy or Gibbs free energy (8.10) – or the negative of the
ELBO. A key feature of this alternative formulation is that it does not
require knowledge of the unavailable posterior p(z x).
|
From the derivation above, solving problem (8.9) exactly without
imposinganyconstraintonq(z)wouldyieldthedesiredposteriorp(z x)
|
as the output. Thekey idea of VI is to choose a parametric form q(z ϕ)
|
for the variational posterior that enables the solution of problem
min KL(q(z ϕ) p(x,z)). (8.11)
ϕ | ||
Bythediscussionabove,thisisequivalenttominimizingKL(q(z ϕ) p(z x)),
| || |
despite the fact that p(z x) is not known.
|
The solution q(z ϕ∗) to problem (8.11) is known as I-projection of
|
the distribution p(z x) in the set of distributions q(z ϕ) defined by
| { | }
thegivenparametrization.TheI-projectioncanbetakenasanestimate
of the posterior p(z x). In fact, if the parametrized family q(z ϕ) is
| { | }
rich enough to contain distributions close to the true posterior p(z x),
|
theminimization (8.11)guarantees theapproximate equalityq(z ϕ∗)
| ≃
p(z x).
|
In order to ensure the feasibility of the optimization (8.11), the
parametrized distribution q(z ϕ) is typically selected to have a conve-
|
nient factorization and to have factors with tractable analytical forms,
such as members of the exponential family or GLMs [16].
Amortized VI.∗ The variational posterior q(z ϕ) obtained from
|
the I-projection (8.11) depends on the specific value of the observed
variables x = x. Problem (8.11) is, in fact, solved separately for each
8.2. Variational Inference 191
value x = x. A potentially more efficient solution is to define an in-
ference variational distribution q(z x,ϕ), which models the posterior
|
distribution of z for any value of x = x. The inference distribution is
parametrized byavector ϕ,andistypically implementedusingamulti-
layer neuralnetwork. In this case, it is typically referred to as inference
network. This approach is referred to as amortized VI.
Amortized VI has the key advantage that, once the inference dis-
tribution is learned, one does not need to carry out I-projections for
previously unobserved values of x = x. Instead, one can directly apply
q(z x,ϕ) for the learned values of parameter ϕ [80].
|
The inference distribution q(z x,ϕ) can be obtained by solving the
|
amortized I-projection problem
min E [KL(q(z x,ϕ) p(x,z))], (8.12)
x∼p(x)
ϕ | ||
where the ensemble average is, in practice, replaced by an empirical
average overavailable datapoints x .ThesolutionoftheVIproblem
n
{ }
(8.12) is hence “amortized” across multiple values of x.
M-projection.∗ By Theorem 6.1, the I-projection maximizes a
lower bound– theELBO –on thelog-distribution of the observed data
x. This gives I-projections a strong theoretical justification grounded
in the ML learning principle. Recalling that the KL divergence is not
symmetric (see Sec. 2.6 and Appendix A), one could also define the
alternative problem
min KL(p(z x) q(z ϕ)). (8.13)
ϕ | || |
The solution q(z ϕ∗) to this problem is known as M-projection of the
|
distribution p(z x) in the set of distributions q(z ϕ) defined by the
| { | }
given parametrization.
As for the counterpart (8.7), this problem does not appear to be
solvablesinceitrequiresknowledgeofthedesiredposteriorp(z x).How-
|
ever,theproblemturnsouttohaveaneasysolutionifq(z ϕ)belongsto
|
theexponential family. Infact, the gradient with respectto thenatural
parameters ϕ of the KL divergence in (8.7) can be computed by follow-
ing the same steps detailed for ML learning in Sec. 3.3. The upshot of
this computation and of the enforcement of the optimality condition
192 Approximate Inference and Learning
is that the M-projection is obtained by moment matching. Specifically,
one needs to find a value of parameter ϕ such that the expectations
of the sufficient statistics of the model q(z ϕ) under distribution q(z ϕ)
| |
match with the same expectations under the true distribution p(z x).
|
In mathematical terms, the M-projection in the exponential fam-
ily model q(z ϕ) exp(ϕTu(z)), with sufficient statistics u(z), yields
| ∝
natural parameters ϕ∗ that satisfy the moment matching condition
E [u(z)] = E [u(z)]. (8.14)
z∼p(z|x) z∼q (z|ϕ∗)
This derivation is detailed in the Appendix of this chapter. Amortized
inference can be defined in a similar way as for I-projection.
1.4
1.2 I-projection
1
0.8
M-projection
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
Figure8.1:ExampleofI-andM-projectionsofamixtureofGaussiansdistribution
(dashed line).
Example 8.2. This simple example is meant to provide an intuitive
comparisonbetweentheapproximationsproducedbyI-andM-projections.
To this end, consider a mixture of Gaussians distribution
p(z x) = 0.3 (z µ = 1,σ2 = 0.3)+0.7 (z µ = 1,σ2 = 0.3),
| N | 1 − 1 N | 2 2
(8.15)
8.2. Variational Inference 193
as shown in Fig. 8.1. Note that this example is clearly idealized, since
in practice the conditional distribution p(z x) is not known. Assume
|
the variational distribution q(z ϕ) = (z m,γ2) with variational pa-
| N |
rameters ϕ = (m,γ2). The M-projection returns the moment matching
estimates m = E [z] = 0.4 and γ2 = var [z] = 0.3((µ
z∼p(z|x) z∼p(z|x) 1
−
m)2 + σ2) + 0.7((µ m)2 + σ2) = 1.93 for i = 1,2. Instead, the I-
1 2 − 2
projection can be computed numerically, yielding m = 1 and γ2 = 0.3.
The I- and M-projections are also plotted in Fig. 8.1.
The previous example illustrates a few important facts about I-
and M-projections. First, the I-projection tends to be mode-seeking
and exclusive. Mathematically, this is because the variational posterior
q(z ϕ) determines the support over which the distributions p(z x) and
| |
q(z ϕ) are compared by the KL divergence. Therefore, I-projections
|
tend to underestimate the variance of a distribution2. Furthermore,
the I-projection is generally more accurate where p(z x) is larger. In
|
contrast, the M-projection tends to be inclusive and to span the entire
supportofp(z x).ThisisbecausetheM-projectionpreferstoavoidzero
|
values for q(z ϕ) at values of z such that p(z x) = 0 in order to avoid
| | 6
an infinite KL divergence. We refer to Fig. 6.5 for a related example.
α Divergence.∗ As already discussed in Sec. 6.4.3, the KL diver-
−
gence is only one among many possible ways to define a measure of
distance between two distributions. A metric that has found useful ap-
plications in the context of VI is the α-divergence introduced in [96].
Theα-divergence between two distributions p(x) and q(x) is defined as
αp(x)+(1 α)q(x) p(x)αq(x)1−α
D (p q) = x − − , (8.16)
α
|| α(1 α)
P −
where p and q need not be normalized, and α is a parameter. It can
be proved that, as α 0, we obtain D (p q) = KL(q p), and, when
α
→ || ||
α 1, we have D (p q) = KL(p q). Consistently with the discus-
α
→ || ||
sion about I- and M-projections in the previous example, perform-
ing projections of the type min D (p(xz) q(z ϕ)) with α 0 and
ϕ α
| || | ≤
decreasing values of α yields an increasingly mode-seeking, or exclu-
sive, solution; while increasing values of α 1 yield progressively
≥
2See[147]foranexamplethatdemonstratesthelimitationsofthisgeneralstate-
ment.
194 Approximate Inference and Learning
more inclusive and zero-avoiding solutions (see [96, Fig. 1]). Finally,
for all α = 0, it can be proved that the stationary points of the pro-
6
jection min D (p(xz) q(z ϕ)) coincide with those of the projection
ϕ α
| || |
min KL(p(xz) p(xz)αq(z ϕ)1−α). The α-divergence can be further
ϕ
| || | |
generalized as discussed in Appendix A.
8.2.1 Mean Field Variational Inference
Mean Field VI (MFVI) is a VI method that leads to a universal, or
black-box, Bayesian inference technique, such as Gibbs sampling for
MC techniques. MFVI assumes the factorization q(z) = q(z ), and
j j
performsanI-projection iteratively foronehiddenvariablez atatime,
Q i
whilefixingthefactorsq (z )fortheotherlatentvariablesz withj = i.
j j j
6
No constraints are imposed on each factor q (z ). This corresponds to
j j
tacklingtheI-projectionproblemusingblockcoordinatedescentwithin
the given factorized family of distributions.
For each factor q (z ), the I-projection problem minimizes the vari-
i i
ational free energy
E [E [lnp(x,z)]] H(q (z )), (8.17)
−
zi∼qi(zi) j6=i
−
j j
j
X
where we have defined for brevity the expectation
E [lnp(x,z)] = E [lnp(x,z , z )]. (8.18)
j6=i {zj}j6=i∼ j6=i qj(zj) i { j } j6=i
Neglecting constants independeQnt of q (z ), this problem is equivalent
i i
to the minimization
min KL(q (z ) exp(E [lnp(x,z)])). (8.19)
i i j6=i
qi ||
The solution to this problem can be easily seen to be obtained by
normalizing the right-hand argument of the divergence as
exp(E [lnp(x,z)])
j6=i
q (z ) = . (8.20)
i i
exp(E [lnp(x,z)])
zi j6=i
P
MFVI solves the system of equations (8.20) for all i by cycling
through the factors q (z ) or by choosing them randomly. Note that, as
i i
8.2. Variational Inference 195
discussed more generally above, this procedure does not require knowl-
edge of the desired posterior p(z x) but only of the joint distribution
|
p(x,z).TheMFVIiterations areguaranteedtoconvergetoastationary
point of the KL minimization problem.
It remains to discuss how to evaluate the expectations in (8.20). To
this end, let us assume that the joint distribution p(x,z) factorizes as
p(x,z) = Z−1 ψ (x ,z ) as for MRFs or BNs – recall that in the
c c c c
latter case, we have Z = 1. The MFVI equation (8.20) can be written
Q
as
q (z ) exp E lnψ (x ,z )
i i j6=i c c c
∝ " #!
c
X (8.21)
=exp E lnψ (x ,z ) .
j6=i c c c
" #!
c:z Xi∈zc
In the second line we have used the fact that it is sufficient to consider
only the factors corresponding to cliques that include z . This enables
i
implementations by means of local message passing (see, e.g., [81]).
Furthermore, additional simplifications are possible when the factors
ψ (x ,z ) are log-linear, as illustrated by the next example.
c c c
0
10
-2
10
-4
10
0 1 2 3 4
number of iterations
ecnegrevid
LK
Figure 8.2: KLdivergencebetweenactualposteriorandmean-fieldapproximation
as a function of the numberof iterations of MFVI (η =0.15).
1
Example 8.3. Consider again the Ising model (8.4). The MFVI equa-
196 Approximate Inference and Learning
tions (8.21) for approximating the posterior p(z x) are given as
|
q (z ) exp η E [z z ]+η x z
i i
∝
1 zj∼q(zj) i j 2 i i
(cid:16) {Xi,j} (cid:17)
(8.22)
=exp z η E [z ]+η x ,
i 1 zj∼q(zj) j 2 i
(cid:16) (cid:16) {Xi,j} (cid:17)(cid:17)
and hence, upon normalization, we have
1
q (z = 1) = , (8.23)
i i
1+exp( 2(η µ +η x ))
− 1 {i,j} j 2 i
P
= σ 2 η µ +η x ,
1 j 2 i
  
{Xi,j}
  
where µ = q (z = 1) q (z = 1) = 2q (z = 1) 1.
i i i i i i i
− − −
For a numerical example, consider a 4 4 binary image z observed
×
as matrix x, where the joint distribution of x and z is given by the
Ising model. Note that, according to this model, the observed matrix x
is such that each pixel of the original matrix z is flipped independently
with probability σ( 2η ). In this small example, it is easy to generate
2
−
an image x distributed according to the model, as well as to compute
the exact posterior p(z x) by enumeration of all possible images z. The
|
KL divergence KL(p(xz) q (z )) obtained at the end of each iter-
| || i i i
ation of MFVI – with one iteration applying (8.23) one by one to all
Q
variables – is shown in Fig. 8.2 for η = 0.15 and various values of η .
1 2
As η increases, the posterior distribution tends to become determinis-
2
tic, since x is an increasingly accurate measurement of z. As a result,
the final mean-field approximation is more faithful to the real poste-
rior, since a product distribution can capture a deterministic pmf. For
smallervaluesofη ,however,thebiasduetothemean-fieldassumption
2
yields a significant floor on the achievable KL divergence.
Beyond MFVI.∗ MFVI assumes a fully factorized variational dis-
tribution q(z). It is also possible to develop methods that are based on
the same factorization as the joint distribution p(x,z). This is known
as the Bethe approach, and yields Loopy Belief Propagation (LBP) as
a specific solution technique. LBP can also be interpreted as the ap-
plication of message passing belief propagation, which was described
8.3. Monte Carlo-Based Variational Inference∗ 197
in Sec. 7.4, to factor graphs with loops. Simplifications of loopy belief
propagation include Approximate Message Passing (AMP). When ap-
plied to M-projections with factors restricted to lie in the exponential
family, the approach yields the Expectation Propagation method. We
refer to [81, 114] for details.
∗
8.3 Monte Carlo-Based Variational Inference
The VI methods described in the previous section require the evalua-
tion of expectations with respect to the variational posterior (see, e.g.,
(8.20)). The feasibility of this operation relies on specific assumptions
about the variational posterior, such as its factorization properties and
membership of the exponential family. It is hence desirable to devise
methods that do not require the exact computation of the ensemble
averages with respect to the variational posterior q(z ϕ). As we will
|
see below, this is possible by combining VI methods with MC approxi-
mations. The resulting methods can leverage SGD, scale to large data
sets, and have found a large number of recent applications [24, 25, 7].
The key idea of MC-based VI is to approximate the KL divergence
(8.10) via MC by drawing one or more samples z q(z), with m =
m
∼
1,...,M, and by computing the empirical average
M
1
KL(q(z) p(x,z)) (lnq(z ) lnp(x,z )). (8.24)
m m
|| ≃ M −
m=1
X
In order to optimize over the parameters ϕ of the variational posterior
q(z ϕ), it is in fact more useful to approximate the gradient of the KL
|
divergence, as discussed next.
REINFORCE approach. To proceed, assume the following two
rather mild conditions on the parametrized variational posterior: (i) it
is easy to draw samples z q(z ϕ); and (ii) it is possible to compute
∼ |
thegradient lnq(z ϕ). Wecannow develop anSGD-basedschemeas
ϕ
∇ |
follows.ThemainresultisthatthegradientoftheKLdivergenceinthe
I-projection problem (8.11) with respect to the variational parameters
ϕ can be written as
KL(q(z ϕ) p(x,z)) = E [ lnq(zϕ)l (x,z)], (8.25)
ϕ z∼q(z|ϕ) ϕ ϕ
∇ | || ∇ |
198 Approximate Inference and Learning
where we have defined the learning signal
l (x,z) = lnq(z ϕ) lnp(x,z). (8.26)
ϕ
| −
Toobtain(8.25),wehaveusedtheidentity lnq(z ϕ) = q(z ϕ)/q(z ϕ),
ϕ ϕ
∇ | ∇ | |
whichfollowsfromthechainrulefordifferentiation,aswellastheequal-
ity E [ lnq(zϕ)] = 0 (see [25] for details).
z∼q(z|ϕ) ϕ
∇ |
MC-based VI methods evaluate an MC approximation of the gradi-
ent(8.25)atagivenvalueϕbydrawingoneormoresamplesz q(z ϕ),
m
∼ |
with m = 1,...,M, and then computing
M
1
KL(q(z ϕ) p(x,z)) [ lnq(z ϕ)l (x,z )]. (8.27)
ϕ ϕ m ϕ m
∇ | || ≃ M ∇ |
m=1
X
This estimate is also known as likelihood ratio or REINFORCE gradi-
ent, and it can be used to update the value of ϕ using SGD (see Sec.
4.1). The name reflects the origin and the importance of the approach
inthereinforcementlearningliterature,aswebrieflydiscussinChapter
93
In practice, these gradients have high variance. This is intuitively
due to the fact that this estimator does not use any information about
how a change in z affects the learning signal l (x,z), since it only
ϕ
depends on the value of this signal. Therefore, techniques such as Rao-
Blackwellization or control variates need to be introduced in order to
reduce its variance (see [89] for a review). Simplifications are possible
whenthevariationalposteriorisassumedtofactorize,e.g.,accordingto
the mean-field full factorization. This approach is used in the black-box
inference method of [120].
Reparametrization trick. In order to mitigate the problem of
the high variance of the REINFORCE estimator, the reparametriza-
tion trick leverage additional information about the dependence of the
variational distributionq(z ϕ), andhenceof thelearningsignall (x,z),
ϕ
|
on the variable z. This approach is applicable if: (i) the latent variable
z q(z ϕ) can be written as z =G (w) for some differentiable function
ϕ
∼ |
3In reinforcement learning, it is useful to compute the gradient of the average
rewardE [R(t,x)]withrespecttotheparametersϕdefiningthedistribution
t∼q(t|x,ϕ)
q(t|x,ϕ) of the action t given the current state x of the environment. The reward
R(t,x) is a function, possibly stochastic, of theaction and of thestate.
8.4. Approximate Learning∗ 199
G () and for some rv w s(z) whose distribution does not depend on
ϕ
· ∼
ϕ;and(ii)thevariationalregularization termKL(q(z ϕ) p(z))in(6.12)
| ||
can be computed and differentiated with respect to ϕ. Assumption (ii)
is satisfied by members of the exponential family (see Appendix B). A
typical choice that satisfies these conditions is to set p(z) to be an i.i.d.
Gaussian distribution; w as i.i.d. Gaussian rvs; and function G (w) as
ϕ
G (w) = A w+b , where matrix A and vector b are parametrized
ϕ ϕ ϕ ϕ ϕ
by a multi-layer neural networks. Note that, with this choice, we have
q(z ϕ) = (z b ,A AT). We refer to [73, 95] for other examples.
| N | ϕ ϕ ϕ
To see why these assumptions are useful, let us first rewrite the
objective of the I-projection problem using (6.12) as
KL(q(z ϕ) p(x,z)) = E [lnp(xG (w))]+KL(q(z ϕ) p(z)).
w∼s(z) ϕ
| || − | | ||
(8.28)
We can now approximate the expectation in the first term via an em-
pirical average by generating i.i.d. samples w s(w), m = 1,...,M4.
m
∼
Note that this distribution does not depend on the current iterate ϕ.
We can then estimate the gradient by writing
M
1
KL(q(z ϕ) p(x,z)) [ lnp(xG (w ))]+ KL(q(z ϕ) p(z)).
ϕ ϕ ϕ m ϕ
∇ | || ≃ −M ∇ | ∇ | ||
m=1
X
(8.29)
This approach tends to provide estimate with lower variance than the
REINFORCE gradient, since it exploits the structure of the distribu-
tion q(z ϕ).
|
Both REINFORCE and reparametrization trick can be naturally
combined withamortized inference. We alsorefer to[59]foraproposed
combination of both methods.
∗
8.4 Approximate Learning
As we have discussed, Bayesian inference plays a key role in learning
problems.Inthissection,webrieflydiscussrepresentative schemesthat
incorporateapproximateinferenceforlearning.SinceBayesian learning
4This can beseen as an application of theLaw of theUnconscious Statistician.
200 Approximate Inference and Learning
can directly benefit from approximate inference in evaluating the pos-
terior of the parameters and the variational posterior, we focus here on
the frequentist viewpoint.
ML learning in the presence of hidden variables can be approxi-
mated by maximizing the ELBO with respect to both the model pa-
rameters θ that define the forward model p(xz,θ) and the parameters
|
ϕ of the variational (amortized) model q(z x,ϕ). To understand what
|
is accomplished with this optimization, it is useful to write the ELBO
over a data set = x N using (6.14) as
D { n }n=1
N
lnp(x θ) KL(q(z x ,ϕ) p(z x ,θ)). (8.30)
n n n
| − | || |
n=1
X
As such, for any fixed ϕ, optimizing the ELBO over θ maximizes the
likelihood function in the first term under a variational regularization
term that penalizes posteriors p(z x,θ) that are significantly different
|
from the selected variational posteriors q(z x,ϕ). The choice of a given
|
model for the variational posterior hence drives learning, and should
be treated as model or hyperparameter selection [68].
The maximization of the ELBO over both model and variational
parameters can be carried out in different ways. As a first approach,
one can use EM by performing the E step via approximate inference
to evaluate the posterior of the latent variables. When VI is used for
thispurpose,theresultingschemeisknownasvariational EM.Alterna-
tively,onecanuseSGDwithrespecttobothparametervectors θ andϕ
by leveraging the REINFORCE method or the reparametrization trick.
The reparametrization trick approach is for instance used in the VAE
method for generative modelling [80], also known as Deep Gaussian
Latent Models [122], as well as in the black-box learning approach of
[121] (see also [98]). The KL divergence can also be substituted by an
adversarially learned divergence as in the GAN approach [47] (see Sec.
6.4.3).
WhenthevariationalparametersareupdatedusinganM-projection,
rather than the I-projection that results from the maximization of the
ELBO, the approach of jointly optimizing model and variational pa-
rameters yields the wake-sleep algorithm [65].
8.5. Summary 201
8.5 Summary
Havingobservedinpreviouschaptersthatlearninginprobabilisticmod-
els is often held back by the complexity of exact Bayesian inference for
hiddenvariables,thischapterhasprovidedanoverview ofapproximate,
lower-complexity, inferencetechniques.Wehave focusedonMC andVI
methods, which are most commonly used. The treatment stressed the
impact of design choices in the selection of different types of approxi-
mation criteria, such as M- and I-projection. It also covered the use of
approximate inference in learning problems. Techniques that improve
over the state of the art discussed in this chapter are being actively
investigated. Some additional topics for future research are covered in
the next chapter.
Appendix: M-Projection with the Exponential Family
Inthisappendix,weconsidertheproblemofobtainingtheM-projection
of a distribution p(z) into a model q(z ϕ) = Z(ϕ)−1exp(ϕTu(z)) from
|
the exponential family with sufficient statistics u(z). We will prove
that, if there exists a value of ϕ∗ of the natural parameter vector that
satisfies the moment matching condition (8.14), then q(z ϕ∗) is the
|
M-projection.
We first write the KL divergence as
KL(p(z) q(z ϕ)) = lnZ(ϕ) ϕTE [u(z)] H(p). (8.31)
z∼p(z)
|| | − −
The difference between the KL divergence for a generic parameter vec-
tor ϕ and for the vector ϕ∗ satisfying (8.14) can be written as
KL(p(z) q(z ϕ)) KL(p(z) q(z ϕ∗))
|| | − || |
Z(ϕ)
=ln (ϕ ϕ∗)TE [u(z)]
Z(ϕ∗) − − z∼p(z)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
q(zϕ∗)
=E ln |
z∼q(z|ϕ∗)
" (cid:18) q(z | ϕ) (cid:19)#
=KL(q(z ϕ∗) q(z ϕ)). (8.32)
| || |
Since the latter inequality is non-negative and equal to zero when ϕ =
ϕ∗, this choice of the natural parameters minimizes the KL divergence.
Part V
Conclusions
9
Concluding Remarks
This monograph has provided a brief introduction to machine learn-
ing by focusing on parametric probabilistic models for supervised and
unsupervised learning problems. It has endeavored to describe funda-
mental concepts within a unified treatment starting from first princi-
ples. Throughout the text, we have also provided pointers to advanced
topics that we have only been able only to mention or shortly touch
upon. Here, we offer a brief list of additional important aspects and
open problems that have not been covered in the preceding chapters.
Privacy: In many applications, data sets used to train machine
•
learning algorithms contain sensitive private information, such as per-
sonalpreferencesforrecommendation systems.Itis henceimportantto
ensure that the learned model does not reveal any information about
the individual entries of the training set. This constraint can be for-
mulated using the concept of differential privacy. Typical techniques
to guarantee privacy of individual data points include adding noise to
gradients when training via SGD and relying on mixture of experts
trained with different subsets of the data [1].
Robustness: It has been reported that various machine learning
•
models, including neural networks, are sensitive to small variations in
203
204 Concluding Remarks
the data, producing the wrong response upon minor, properly chosen,
changes in the explanatory variables. Note that such adversarially cho-
sen examples, which cause a specific machine to fail, are conceptually
different from the randomly selected examples that are assumed when
defining the generalization properties of a network. There is evidence
that finding such examples is possible even without knowing the inter-
nal structure of a machine, but solely based on black-box observations
[111]. Modifying the training procedure in order to ensure robustness
to adversarial examples is an active area of research with important
practical implications [55].
Computing platforms and programming frameworks: In order to
•
scale up machine learning applications, it is necessary to leverage dis-
tributed computing architectures and related standard programming
frameworks [17, 7]. As a complementary and more futuristic approach,
recent work has even proposedto leverage the capabilities of annealing-
based quantum computers as samplers [82] or discrete optimizers [103].
Transfer learning: Machines trained for a certain task currently
•
need to be re-trained in order to be re-purposed for a different task.
For instance, a machine that learned how to drive a car would need to
beretrained in order to learn how to drivea truck. The field oftransfer
learning covers scenarios in which one wishes to transfer the expertise
acquired from some tasks to others. Transfer learningincludes different
related paradigms, such as multitask learning, lifelong learning, zero-
shot learning, and domain adaptation [149]. In multitask learning, sev-
eral tasks are learned simultaneously. Typical solutions for multitask
learning based on neural networks prescribe the presence of common
hidden layers among neural networks trained for different tasks [19].
Lifelong learning updates a machine trained on a number of tasks to
carry out a new task by leveraging the knowledge accumulated during
the previous training phases [143]. Zero-shot learning refers to models
capable of recognizing unseen classes with training examples available
only for related, but different, classes. This often entails the task of
learning representation of classes, such as prototype vectors, that gen-
erate data in the class through a fixed probabilistic mechanism [52].
Domain adaptation will be discussed separately in the next point.
205
Domain adaptation: In many learning problems, the available
•
data has a different distribution from the data on which the algorithm
will be tested. For instance, in speech recognition, one has available
data for a given user at learning time, but it may be desirable, after
learning, to use the same machine for another user. For supervised
learning, this is typically modeled by assuming that the distribution of
the covariates x is different during training and test, while the discrim-
inative conditional distribution p(t x) is the same for both phases [149].
|
A generalization of PAC theory analyses domain adaptation, obtaining
bounds on the generalization error under the desired test distribution
as a function of the difference between the training and test distribu-
tions [26].
Communication-efficient learning: In distributed computing plat-
•
forms, data is typically partitioned among the processors and commu-
nication among the processor entails latency and energy consumption.
An important research problem is that of characterizing the best trade-
off between learning performance and communication overhead [160].
Reinforcement learning: Reinforcement learning is at the heart
•
of recent successes of machine learning methods in acquiring the skills
necessary to play video games or games against human opponents (see,
e.g., [99]). In reinforcement learning, one wishes to learn the optimal
mapping,sayq(t x,θ),betweentheobservedstatexoftheworldandan
|
action t. Unlike supervised learning, the optimal action t is not known,
but the machine observes a reward/ punishment signal depending on
the effect of the action. A popular approach, referred to as deep rein-
forcement learning, models the mapping q(t x,θ) using a deep neural
|
network. This is trained to maximize the average reward via SGD by
using the REINFORCE method (Chapter 8) to estimate the gradient
[135, 88, 77, 9].
Appendices
A
Appendix A: Information Measures
In this appendix,we describea principledand intuitive introduction to
information measures that builds on inference, namely estimation and
hypothesis testing. We focus on entropy, mutual information and diver-
gencemeasures.Wealsoconcentrate ondiscretervs.Inthemonograph,
we have taken the pragmatic approach of extending the definitions to
continuous variables by substituting sums with integrals. It is worth
noting that this approach does not come with any practical complica-
tions when dealing with mutual information and divergence. Instead,
the continuous version of the entropy, known as differential entropy,
should be treated with care, as it does not satisfy some key properties
of the entropy such as non-negativity.
A.1 Entropy
As proposed by Claude Shannon, the amount of information received
fromtheobservationofadiscreterandomvariablex p(x)definedover
∼
a finite alphabet should be measured by the amount of uncertainty
X
aboutits value prior to its measurement [134]. To this end, we consider
the problem of estimating the value of x when one only knows the
207
208 Appendix A: Information Measures
probabilistic model p(x). The key idea is that the observation of a
random variable x is more informative if its value is more difficult to
predict a priori, that is, based only on the knowledge of p(x).
Toformalizethisnotion,weneedtospecify:(i)thetypeofestimates
that one is allowed to make on the value of x; and (ii) the loss function
ℓ that is used to measure the accuracy of the estimate. We will proceed
by consideringtwo types of estimates, namelypoint estimates, whereby
one needs to commit to a specific value xˆ as the estimate of x; and
distributional estimates, in which instead we are allowed to produce a
pmf pˆ(x) over alphabet , hence defining a profile of "beliefs" over the
X
possible values of rv x. We will see below that the second approach
yields Shannon entropy, first encountered in this monograph in (2.45).
Point Estimates. Given a point estimate xˆ and an observed value
x ,as we have seen,theestimation error can bemeasuredby a non-
∈ X
negative loss function ℓ(x,xˆ), such the quadratic loss function and the
0-1 loss function. For any given loss function ℓ, based on the discussion
above, we can measure the information accrued by the observation
of x p by evaluating the average loss that is incurred by the best
x
∼
possibleaprioriestimateofx.Thisleadstothedefinitionofgeneralized
entropy [61]
H (p ) = minE [ℓ(x,xˆ)], (A.1)
ℓ x x∼px
xˆ
where the estimate xˆ is not necessarily constrained to lie in the alpha-
bet . As highlighted by the notation H (p ), the generalized entropy
ℓ x
X
depends on the pmf p and on the loss function ℓ. The notion of gen-
x
eralized entropy (A.1) coincides with that of minimum Bayes risk for
the given loss function ℓ.
For the quadratic loss function, the generalized entropy is the vari-
ance of the distribution H (p ) = var(p ). To see this, impose the
ℓ2 x x
optimality condition dE[(x xˆ)2]/dxˆ = 0 to conclude that the opti-
−
mal point estimate is the mean xˆ = E [x]. As for the 0-1 loss, the
x∼px
generalized entropy equals the minimum probability of error for the
detection of x, that is,
H (p ) = min p(x)= 1 maxp(xˆ). (A.2)
ℓ0 x
xˆ − xˆ
x6=xˆ
X
A.1. Entropy 209
This is because the optimal estimate is the mode, i.e., the value xˆ with
the largest probability p(xˆ).
Distributional Estimate. We now consider a different type of
estimation problem in which we are permitted to choose a pmf pˆ(x)
on the alphabet as the estimate for the outcome of variable x. To
X
facilitate intuition, we can imagine pˆ(x) to represent the fraction of
one’s wager that is invested on the outcome of x being a specific value
x.Notethatitmaynotbenecessarily optimaltoputallofone’smoney
on one value x! In fact, this depends on how we measure the reward,
or conversely the cost, obtained when a value x = x is realized.
To this end, we define a non-negative loss function ℓ(x,pˆ ) repre-
x
senting the loss, or the “negative gain”, suffered when the value x = x
is observed. This loss should sensibly be a decreasing function of pˆ(x)
– we register a smaller loss, or conversely a larger gain, when we have
wagered more on the actual outcome x. As a fairly general class of loss
functions, we can hence define
ℓ(x,pˆ )= f(pˆ(x)), (A.3)
x
where f is a decreasing function. More general classes of loss functions
are considered in [46].
Denote as ∆( ) the simplex of pmfs defined over alphabet . The
X X
generalized entropy can now be defined in a way that is formally equiv-
alent to(A.1),with theonly differencebeingtheoptimization over pmf
pˆ rather than over point estimate xˆ:
x
H (p ) = min E [ℓ(x,pˆ )]. (A.4)
ℓ x x∼px x
pˆx∈∆(X)
A key example of loss function ℓ(x,pˆ ) in class (A.3) is the log-loss
x
ℓ(x,pˆ ) = logpˆ(x). The log-loss has a strong motivation in terms of
x
−
losslesscompression.Infact,asdiscussedinSec.2.5,byKraft’sinequal-
ity, it is possible to design a prefix-free – and hence decodable without
delay – lossless compression schemethat uses logpˆ(x) bits to repre-
⌈− ⌉
sent value x. As a result, the choice of a pmf pˆ is akin to the selection
x
of a prefix-free lossless compression scheme that requires a description
of around lnpˆ(x) bits to represent value x. The expectation in (A.4)
−
measuresthecorrespondingaverage numberofbitsrequiredforlossless
compression by the given scheme.
210 Appendix A: Information Measures
Using the log-loss in (A.1), we obtain the Shannon entropy
min E [ lnpˆ(x)], (A.5)
pˆx∈∆(X)
x∼px
−
= E [ lnp(x)] = H(p ). (A.6)
x∼px
−
x
In fact, imposing the optimality condition yields the optimal pmf pˆ(x)
as pˆ(x) = p(x). Equation (A.5) reveals that the entropy H(p ) is the
x
minimum average log-loss when optimizing over all possible pmfs pˆ .
x
It may seem at first glance that the choice pˆ(x) = p(x) should be
optimal formostreasonable loss functions inclass (A.3), butthisis not
the case. In fact, when the alphabet has more than two elements, it
X
can be proved that the log-loss – more generally defined as ℓ(x,pˆ ) =
x
blogpˆ(x)+c with b 0 and any c – is the only loss function of the
≤
form (A.3) for which pˆ(x) =p(x) is optimal [74].
Asafinalnote,thegeneralized entropyH (p )isaconcavefunction
ℓ x
of p , which means that we have the inequality H (λp +(1 λ)q )
x ℓ x x
− ≥
λH (p )+(1 λ)H (q ) for any two distributions p and q and any
ℓ x ℓ x x x
−
0 λ 1. This follows from the fact that the entropy is the minimum
≤ ≤
over a family of linear functionals of p [28]. The concavity of H (p )
x ℓ x
implies that a variable x λp +(1 λ)q distributed according to the
x x
∼ −
mixture of two distributions is more “random”, i.e., it is more difficult
to estimate, than both variables x p and x q .
x x
∼ ∼
A.2 Conditional Entropy and Mutual Information
Given two random variables x and y jointly distributed according to
a known probabilistic model p(x,y), i.e., (x,y) p , we now discuss
xy
∼
how to quantify the information that the observation of one variable,
say y, brings about the other, namely x. Following the same approach
adopted above, we can distinguish two inferential scenarios for this
purpose: in the first, a point estimate xˆ(y) of x needs to be produced
based on the observation of a value y = y and the knowledge of the
joint pmf p ; while, in the second, we are allowed to choose a pmf
xy
pˆ as the estimate of x given the observation y = y.
x|y=y
Point Estimate:Assumingpointestimates andgiven alossfunction
ℓ(x,xˆ), the generalized conditional entropy for an observation y = y is
A.2. Conditional Entropy and Mutual Information 211
defined as the minimum average loss
H (p )= minE [ℓ(x,xˆ(y))y = y]. (A.7)
ℓ x|y=y xˆ(y) x∼p x|y=y |
Note that this definition is consistent with (A.1) as applied to the con-
ditional pmf p . Averaging over the distribution of the observation
x|y=y
y yields the generalized conditional entropy
H (x y) = E [H (p )]. (A.8)
ℓ
|
y∼py ℓ x|y
It is emphasized that the generalized conditional entropy depends on
the joint distribution p , while (A.7) depends only on the conditional
xy
pmf p .
x|y=y
For the squared error, the generalized conditional entropy can be
easilyseentobetheaverageconditionalvarianceH (x y) = E [var(p )],
ℓ2
|
y∼py x|y
since the a posteriori mean xˆ(y) = E [x y = y] is the optimal
x∼p
x|y=y |
estimate. For the 0-1 loss, the generalized conditional entropy H (x y)
ℓ0
|
is instead equal to the minimum probability of error for the detection
of x given y and the MAP estimate xˆ(y) =argmax p(xˆ y) is optimal.
xˆ∈x |
Distributional Estimate: Assumenow that we are allowed to choose
a pmf pˆ as the estimate of x given the observation y = y, and that
x|y=y
we measure the estimation loss via a function ℓ(x,pˆ ) as in (A.3). The
x
definition of generalized conditional entropy for a given value of y = y
follows directly from the arguments above and is given as H (p ),
ℓ x|y=y
while the generalized conditional entropy is (A.8). With the log-loss
function, the definition above can be again seen to coincide with Shan-
non conditional entropy H(x y) = E [ lnp(x y)].
|
x,y∼px,y
− |
If x and y are independent, we have the equality H (x y) = H (x).
ℓ ℓ
|
Furthermore, since in (A.7) we can always choose estimates that are
independent of y, we generally have the inequality H (x y) H (x):
ℓ ℓ
| ≤
observing y, on average, can only decrease the entropy. Note, however,
thatit is nottruethat H (p ) isnecessarily smaller thanH (x)[38].
ℓ x|y=y ℓ
Mutual Information: The inequality H (x y) H (x) justifies the
ℓ ℓ
| ≤
definition of generalized mutual information with respect to the given
loss function ℓ as
I (x;y) = H (x) H (x y). (A.9)
ℓ ℓ ℓ
− |
212 Appendix A: Information Measures
The mutual information measures the decrease in average loss that is
obtained by observing y as compared to having only prior informa-
tion about p . This notion of mutual information is in line with the
x
concept of statistical information proposed by DeGroot (see [46] for
a recent treatment). With the log-loss, the generalized mutual infor-
mation (A.9) reduces to Shannon’s mutual information. As shown in
[75], the log-loss is in fact the only loss function, up to multiplicative
factors, under which the generalized mutual information (A.9) satisfies
the data processing inequality, as long as the alphabet of x has more
than two elements.
A.3 Divergence Measures
We now discuss a way to quantify the “difference” between two given
probabilistic models p and q defined over the same alphabet . We
x x
X
consider here the viewpoint of binary hypothesis testing as a theoret-
ical framework in which to tackle the issue. Other related approaches
have also found applications in machine learning, including optimal
transport theory and kernel methods [8].
We consider the following standard binary hypothesis testing prob-
lem. Given an observation x, decide whether x was generated from pmf
p or from pmf q . To proceed, we define a decision rule T(x), which
x x
should have the property that it is increasing with the certainty that
a value x = x is generated from p rather than q . For example, in
x x
practice, one may impose a threshold on the rule T(x) so that, when
T(x) is larger than the threshold, a decision is made that x = x was
generated from p .
x
In order to design the decision rule T(x), we again minimize a loss
function or, equivalently, maximize a merit function. For convenience,
herewetakethelatter approach,anddefinetheproblemofmaximizing
the merit function
E [T(x)] E [g(T(x))] (A.10)
x∼px
−
x∼qx
over the rule T(x), where g is a concave increasing function. This cri-
terion can be motivated as follows: (i) It increases if T(x) is large, on
average, for values of x generated from p ;and (ii) it decreases if, upon
x
A.3. Divergence Measures 213
expectation, T(x) is large for values of x generated from q . The func-
x
tion g can be used to define the relative importance of errors made in
favor ofonedistributionor theother. From thisdiscussion,theoptimal
value of (A.10) can be taken to be a measure of the distance between
thetwo pmfs.Thisyieldsthefollowingdefinitionofdivergence between
two pmfs
D (p q ) = max E [T(x)] E [g(T(x))], (A.11)
f x
||
x
T(x)
x∼px
−
x∼qx
where the subscript f will be justified below.
Undersuitabledifferentiability assumptionsonfunctiong (see[107]
for generalizations), taking the derivative with respect to T(x) for all
x x yields the optimality condition g′(T(x)) = p(x)/q(x). This rela-
∈
tionship reveals the connection between the optimal detector T(x) and
the LLR p(x)/q(x). Plugging this result into (A.11), it can be directly
checked that the following equality holds [105]
p (x)
x
D (p q )= E f , (A.12)
f x
||
x x∼qx
q (x)
(cid:20) (cid:18) x (cid:19)(cid:21)
where the function f(x) = g∗(x) is the convex dual function of g(t),
which is defined as g∗(x) = sup (xt g(t)). Note that dual function f
t −
is always convex [28].
Under the additional constraint f(1) = 0, definition (A.12) de-
scribes a large class of divergence measures parametrized by the con-
vex functionf,whichareknownasf-divergencesorAli-Silvey distance
measures [45].Note thatthe constraint f(1)= 0 ensuresthat thediver-
gence is zero when the pmfs p and q are identical. Among their key
x x
properties, f-divergences satisfy the data processing inequality [45].
For example, the choice g(t) = exp(t 1), which gives the dual con-
−
vex f(x) = xlnx, yields the optimal detector T(x)= 1+ln(p(x)/q(x))
and the corresponding divergence measure (A.12) is the standard KL
divergenceKL(p q ).Asanotherinstanceoff-divergence,withg(t) =
x x
||
ln(2 exp(t))weobtaintheoptimaldetectorT(x) = ln(2p (x)/p (x)+
x x
− −
q (x)), and D (p q ) becomes the Jensen-Shannon divergence1. For
x f x x
||
1TheJensen-Shannondivergencecanalsobeinterpretedasthemutualinforma-
tion I(s;x)
214 Appendix A: Information Measures
reference, the latter can be written as
JS(p q )= KL(p m )+KL(q m ), (A.13)
x x x x x x
|| k k
wherem (x) = (p (x)+q (x))/2.2 Another special case, which general-
x x x
izes the KL divergence and other metrics, is theα-divergence discussed
in Chapter 8 (see (8.16)), which is obtained with f(x) = (α(x 1)
− −
(xα 1))/(α(1 α)) for some real-valued parameter α. We refer to [107,
− −
45] for other examples.
The discussion above justified the adoption of the loss function
(A.11) in a heuristic fashion. It is, however, possible to derive formal
relationships between theerrorprobability of binaryhypothesistesting
and f-divergences [21]. We also refer to the classical Sanov lemma and
Stein lemma as fundamental applications of KL divergence to large
deviation and hypothesis testing [38].
2TheJensen-Shannondivergence,asdefinedabove,isproportionaltothemutual
information I(s;x) for the joint distribution p (s,x) = 1/2·p (x|s) with binary
s,x x|s
s, and conditional pmf definedas p (x|0)=p (x) and p (x|s)(x|1)=q (x).
x|s x x|s x
B
Appendix B: KL Divergence and Exponential
Family
Inthisappendix,weprovideageneralexpressionfortheKLdivergence
between two distributions p(xη ) and p(xη ) from the same regular
1 2
| |
exponential family with log-partition function A(), sufficient statistics
·
u(x), and moment parameters µ and µ , respectively. We recall from
1 2
Chapter 3 that the log-partition function is convex and that we have
the identity A(η) = µ.
∇
TheKL divergence between thetwo distributions can betranslated
into a divergence on the space of natural parameters. In particular, the
following relationship holds [6]
KL(p(xη ) p(xη )) = D (η ,η ), (B.1)
1 2 A 2 1
| || |
where D (η ,η ) represents the Bregman divergence with generator
A 2 1
function given by the log-partition function A(), that is
·
D (η ,η )= A(η ) A(η ) (η η )T A(η )
A 2 1 2 1 2 1 1
− − − ∇
= A(η ) A(η ) (η η )Tµ . (B.2)
2 1 2 1 1
− − −
The first line of (B.2) is the general definition of the Bregman diver-
gence D (, ) with a generator function A(), while the second follows
A
· · ·
from the relationship (3.10). Note that the Bregman divergence can be
215
216 Appendix B: KL Divergence and Exponential Family
proved to be non-negative, and convex in its first argument, but not
necessarily in the second argument. The equality (B.1)-(B.2) can be
proved by using the definition of exponential family via the following
equality
p(x η )
1
KL(p(xη ) p(xη )) = E log |
|
1
|| |
2 x∼p(x|η1)
p(x η )
(cid:20) | 2 (cid:21)
= E [(η η )Tu(x)] A(η )+A(η ).
x∼p(x|η1) 1
−
2
−
1 2
(B.3)
Recalling again that we have the equality A(η ) = µ , the rela-
1 1
∇
tionship (B.1)-(B.2) can be approximated as
1
KL(p(xη ) p(xη )) = (η η )TJ (η η )+O( η η 3),
|
1
|| |
2
N
1
−
2 η1 1
−
2
||
1
−
2
||
(B.4)
where J = E 2lnp(x η) is the Fisher information matrix. This
η − ∇η |
expansion holds ghiven the reliationship 2A(η) = J [45].
∇η η
Itis alsopossibletowritearelationship analogous to (B.1)-(B.2)in
terms of mean parameters. This is done by using the convex conjugate
function
A∗(µ) = supηTµ A(η), (B.5)
η −
where the maximization is over the feasible set of natural parameters.
In fact, the optimization over η yields the natural parameter η corre-
sponding to the mean parameter µ, i.e., A(η) = µ. It hence follows
∇
from (B.2) that we have
KL(p(xµ ) p(xµ )) = A∗(µ ) A∗(µ ) (µ µ )Tη
1 2 1 2 1 2 2
| || | − − −
= D (µ ,µ ), (B.6)
A∗ 1 2
whereinthesecondlinewehaveusedtheinversemapping A (µ) = η
∇ ∗
between mean and natural parameters (which holds for minimal fami-
lies).
Chernoffdivergencemeasures,includingtheBhattacharyyadistance,
can also be written in closed form for exponential families [106].
Acknowledgements
Osvaldo Simeone has received funding from the European Research
Council(ERC)undertheEuropeanUnion’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme (grant agreement No 725731).
217
References
[1] Abadi, M., Ú. Erlingsson, I. Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMa-
han, I. Mironov, N. Papernot, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang. 2017.
“On the Protection of Private Information in Machine Learning
Systems: Two Recent Approaches”. ArXiv e-prints. Aug. arXiv:
1708.08022 [stat.ML].
[2] Abu-Mostafa, Y. S., M. Magdon-Ismail, and H.-T. Lin. 2012.
Learning from data. Vol. 4. AMLBook New York, NY, USA.
[3] Agakov,F.2005.VariationalInformation MaximizationinStochas-
tic Environments (PhD thesis). University of Edinburgh.
[4] Alemi,A.A.,B.Poole,andE.a.Fischer.2017.“AnInformation-
Theoretic Analysis of Deep Latent-Variable Models”. ArXiv e-
prints. Nov. arXiv: 1711.00464v1.
[5] Amari, S.-I. 1998. “Natural gradient works efficiently in learn-
ing”. Neural computation. 10(2): 251–276.
[6] Amari, S.-i. 2016. Information geometry and its applications.
Springer.
[7] Angelino,E.,M.J.Johnson,R.P.Adams,et al.2016.“Patterns
of scalable Bayesian inference”. Foundations and TrendsR in
(cid:13)
Machine Learning. 9(2-3): 119–247.
[8] Arjovsky, M., S. Chintala, and L. Bottou. 2017. “Wasserstein
GAN”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875.
218
References 219
[9] Arulkumaran, K., M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A.
Bharath.2017. “Deep Reinforcement Learning:A Brief Survey”.
IEEESignalProcessing Magazine.34(6):26–38.issn:1053-5888.
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2017.2743240.
[10] Azoury, K. S. and M. K. Warmuth. 2001. “Relative loss bounds
for on-line density estimation with the exponential family of
distributions”. Machine Learning. 43(3): 211–246.
[11] Bagheri, A., O. Simeone, and B. Rajendran. 2017. “Training
Probabilistic Spiking Neural Networks with First-to-spike De-
coding”. ArXiv e-prints. Oct. arXiv: 1710.10704 [stat.ML].
[12] Baldi, P., P. Sadowski, and Z. Lu. 2016. “Learning in the ma-
chine:Randombackpropagationandthelearningchannel”.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.02734.
[13] Bamler, R., C. Zhang, M. Opper, and S. Mandt. 2017. “Pertur-
bative Black Box Variational Inference”. ArXiv e-prints. Sept.
arXiv: 1709.07433 [stat.ML].
[14] Baraniuk, R. G. 2007. “Compressive sensing [lecture notes]”.
IEEE signal processing magazine. 24(4): 118–121.
[15] Barber,D.2012.Bayesianreasoning andmachinelearning.Cam-
bridge University Press.
[16] Beal,M.J.2003.Variationalalgorithms forapproximate Bayesian
inference. University of London London.
[17] Bekkerman, R., M. Bilenko, and J. Langford. 2011. Scaling up
machinelearning:Parallelanddistributedapproaches.Cambridge
University Press.
[18] Belghazi,I.,S.Rajeswar,A.Baratin,R.D.Hjelm,andA.Courville.
2018. “MINE: Mutual Information Neural Estimation”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1801.04062.
[19] Bengio, Y. 2012. “Deep learning of representations for unsuper-
vised andtransfer learning”. In:Proceedings of ICML Workshop
on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning. 17–36.
[20] Bengio, Y., A. Courville, and P. Vincent. 2013. “Representation
learning:Areviewandnewperspectives”.IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence. 35(8): 1798–1828.
220 References
[21] Berisha, V., A. Wisler, A. O. Hero, and A. Spanias. 2016. “Em-
pirically estimable classification boundsbasedon anonparamet-
ric divergence measure”. IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing. 64(3): 580–591.
[22] Bertsekas, D. P. 2011. “Incremental gradient, subgradient, and
proximalmethodsforconvexoptimization:Asurvey”.Optimiza-
tion for Machine Learning. 2010(1-38): 3.
[23] Bishop, C. M. 2006. Pattern recognition and machine learning.
Springer.
[24] Blei, D. M., A. Kucukelbir, and J. D. McAuliffe. 2017. “Varia-
tionalinference:Areviewforstatisticians”.Journalofthe Amer-
ican Statistical Association. (just-accepted).
[25] Blei,D.,R.Ranganath,andS.Mohamed.“VariationalInference:
Foundations and Modern Methods”.
[26] Blitzer,J.,K.Crammer,A.Kulesza,F.Pereira,andJ.Wortman.
2008. “Learning bounds for domain adaptation”. In: Advances
in neural information processing systems. 129–136.
[27] Blundell, C., J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra.
2015. “Weight uncertainty in neural networks”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1505.05424.
[28] Boyd,S.andL.Vandenberghe.2004.Convexoptimization.Cam-
bridge university press.
[29] Brakel,P.andY.Bengio.2017.“LearningIndependentFeatures
with Adversarial Nets for Non-linear ICA”. ArXiv e-prints. Oct.
arXiv: 1710.05050 [stat.ML].
[30] Bronstein, M. M., J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Van-
dergheynst. 2017. “Geometric deep learning: going beyond eu-
clidean data”. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 34(4): 18–42.
[31] Brynjolfsson, E. and T. Mitchell. 2017. “What can machine
learning do? Workforce implications”. Science. 358(6370): 1530–
1534.
[32] Burda,Y., R.Grosse, and R. Salakhutdinov. 2015. “Importance
weighted autoencoders”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.00519.
References 221
[33] Cevher,V.,S.Becker, andM.Schmidt.2014.“Convex optimiza-
tion for big data: Scalable, randomized, and parallel algorithms
forbigdataanalytics”.IEEE Signal Processing Magazine.31(5):
32–43.
[34] Cheeseman, P. C. 1985. “In Defense of Probability.” In: IJCAI.
Vol. 85. 1002–1009.
[35] Cichocki,A.,D.Mandic,L.DeLathauwer,G.Zhou,Q.Zhao,C.
Caiafa,andH.A.Phan.2015.“Tensordecompositionsforsignal
processing applications: From two-way to multiway component
analysis”. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. 32(2): 145–163.
[36] Collins, M., S. Dasgupta, and R. E. Schapire. 2002. “A gener-
alization of principal components analysis to the exponential
family”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
617–624.
[37] Cortes,C.andV.Vapnik.1995.“Support-vectornetworks”.Ma-
chine learning. 20(3): 273–297.
[38] Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas. 2012. Elements of information
theory. John Wiley & Sons.
[39] Cristianini, N. and J. Shawe-Taylor. 2000. An introduction to
support vector machines and other kernel-based learning meth-
ods. Cambridge university press.
[40] Csiszár, I. and P. C. Shields. 2004. “Information theory and
statistics: A tutorial”. Foundations and TrendsR in Communi-
(cid:13)
cations and Information Theory. 1(4): 417–528.
[41] Davidson-Pilon,C.2015.“ProbabilisticProgramming&Bayesian
Methods for Hackers”.
[42] Dayan, P., G. E. Hinton, R. M. Neal, and R. S. Zemel. 1995.
“The helmholtz machine”. Neural computation. 7(5): 889–904.
[43] De, S., G. Taylor, and T. Goldstein. 2015. “Variance Reduction
for Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.01708.
[44] Di Lorenzo, P. and G. Scutari. 2016. “Next: In-network noncon-
vex optimization”. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Informa-
tion Processing over Networks. 2(2): 120–136.
222 References
[45] Duchi, J. 2016. “Lecture Notes for Statistics 311/Electrical En-
gineering 377”.
[46] Duchi, J. C., K. Khosravi, and F. Ruan. 2016. “Information
Measures, Experiments, Multi-category Hypothesis Tests, and
Surrogate Losses”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.00126.
[47] Dumoulin, V., I. Belghazi, B. Poole, O. Mastropietro, A. Lamb,
M. Arjovsky, and A. Courville. 2016. “Adversarially learned in-
ference”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704.
[48] Efron, B. and T. Hastie. 2016. Computer Age Statistical Infer-
ence. Vol. 5. Cambridge University Press.
[49] Fedus, W., M. Rosca, B. Lakshminarayanan, A. M. Dai, S. Mo-
hamed, and I. Goodfellow. 2017. “Many Paths to Equilibrium:
GANs Do Not Need to Decrease a Divergence At Every Step”.
ArXiv e-prints. Oct. arXiv: 1710.08446 [stat.ML].
[50] Feutry, C., P. Piantanida, Y. Bengio, and P. Duhamel. 2018.
“LearningAnonymizedRepresentationswithAdversarialNeural
Networks”. ArXiv e-prints. Feb. arXiv: 1802.09386 [stat.ML].
[51] Friedman, J., T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. 2001. The elements
of statistical learning. Vol. 1. Springer series in statistics New
York.
[52] Fu, Y., T. Xiang, Y.-G. Jiang, X. Xue, L. Sigal, and S. Gong.
2017.“Recentadvancesinzero-shotrecognition”.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.04837.
[53] Gal, Y. 2016. “Uncertainty in Deep Learning”. PhD thesis. Uni-
versity of Cambridge.
[54] Gersho,A.andR.M.Gray.2012.Vectorquantization andsignal
compression. Vol. 159. Springer Science & Business Media.
[55] Goodfellow, I. J., J.Shlens,and C.Szegedy. 2014a. “Explaining
andharnessingadversarialexamples”.arXivpreprintarXiv:1412.6572.
[56] Goodfellow,I.,Y.Bengio,andA.Courville.2016.Deep learning.
MIT press.
[57] Goodfellow, I., J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-
Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. 2014b. “Genera-
tive adversarial nets”. In: Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems. 2672–2680.
References 223
[58] Grant, M., and Y. Ye. arti. “cvx users’ guide”.
[59] Grathwohl, W., D. Choi, Y. Wu, G. Roeder, and D. Duvenaud.
2017. “Backpropagation through the Void: Optimizing control
variates for black-box gradient estimation”. ArXiv e-prints. Oct.
arXiv: 1711.00123 [cs.LG].
[60] Grunwald, P. D. 2007. The minimum description length princi-
ple. MIT press.
[61] Grünwald, P. D., A. P. Dawid, et al. 2004. “Game theory, max-
imum entropy, minimum discrepancy and robust Bayesian deci-
sion theory”. the Annals of Statistics. 32(4): 1367–1433.
[62] Guardian), S. L. ( 2016. A beauty contest was judged by AI and
therobots didn’tlikedarkskin.url:http://www.nytimes.com/1958/07/08/archives/new-navy-device-learns-by-doing-psychologist-shows-embryo-of.html.
[63] Haveliwala, T. H. 2003. “Topic-sensitive pagerank: A context-
sensitive ranking algorithm for web search”. IEEE transactions
on knowledge and data engineering. 15(4): 784–796.
[64] Hinton,G.2016.“NeuralNetworksforMachineLearning(online
course)”.
[65] Hinton, G. E., P. Dayan, B. J. Frey, and R. M. Neal. 1995.
“The" wake-sleep" algorithm for unsupervised neural networks”.
Science. 268(5214): 1158.
[66] Hochreiter,S.andJ.Schmidhuber.1997.“Flatminima”.Neural
Computation. 9(1): 1–42.
[67] Huang,G.-B.,Q.-Y.Zhu,andC.-K.Siew.2006. “Extremelearn-
ing machine: theory and applications”. Neurocomputing. 70(1):
489–501.
[68] Huszár, F. 2017a. “Choice of Recognition Models in VAEs: a
regularisation view”.
[69] Huszár, F. 2017b. “Is Maximum Likelihood Useful for Represen-
tation Learning?”
[70] Huszár,F.2017c. “Variational InferenceusingImplicitDistribu-
tions”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08235.
[71] Huszár,F.“EverythingthatWorksWorksBecauseit’sBayesian:
Why Deep Nets Generalize?”
224 References
[72] Jain, P. and P. Kar. 2017. “Non-convex Optimization for Ma-
chine Learning”. Foundations and TrendsR in Machine Learn-
(cid:13)
ing.10(3-4):142–336.issn:1935-8237.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000058.
[73] Jang, E., S. Gu, and B. Poole. 2016. “Categorical reparameteri-
zation with gumbel-softmax”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144.
[74] Jiao, J., T. A. Courtade, A. No, K. Venkat, and T. Weissman.
2014. “Information measures: the curious case of the binary
alphabet”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. 60(12):
7616–7626.
[75] Jiao, J., T. A. Courtade, K. Venkat, and T. Weissman. 2015.
“Justification of logarithmic loss via the benefit of side informa-
tion”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. 61(10): 5357–
5365.
[76] Johnson, R. and T. Zhang. 2013. “Accelerating stochastic gra-
dient descent usingpredictive variance reduction”. In:Advances
in neural information processing systems. 315–323.
[77] Karpathy,A.“DeepReinforcementLearning:PongfromPixels”.
url: http://karpathy.github.io/2016/05/31/rl/.
[78] Kawaguchi, K.,L.Pack Kaelbling,andY.Bengio. 2017. “Gener-
alizationinDeepLearning”.ArXive-prints.Oct.arXiv:1710.05468 [stat.ML].
[79] Keskar, N. S., D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy, and
P. T. P. Tang. 2016. “On large-batch training for deep learning:
Generalizationgapandsharpminima”.arXivpreprintarXiv:1609.04836.
[80] Kingma,D.P.andM.Welling.2013.“Auto-encodingvariational
bayes”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114.
[81] Koller,D.andN.Friedman.2009.Probabilistic graphical models:
principles and techniques. MIT press.
[82] Korenkevych, D., Y.Xue, Z.Bian,F. Chudak,W. G.Macready,
J.Rolfe,andE.Andriyash.2016.“Benchmarkingquantumhard-
ware for training of fully visible boltzmann machines”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.04528.
[83] LeCun, Y., S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, M. Ranzato, and F. Huang.
2006. “A tutorial on energy-based learning”. Predicting struc-
tured data. 1.
References 225
[84] Lee, J. H., T. Delbruck, and M. Pfeiffer. 2016. “Training deep
spiking neural networks using backpropagation”. Frontiers in
neuroscience. 10.
[85] Lee, T.-W., M. Girolami, and T. J. Sejnowski. 1999. “Indepen-
dent component analysis using an extended infomax algorithm
for mixed subgaussian and supergaussian sources”. Neural com-
putation. 11(2): 417–441.
[86] Lehmann,E.L.andG.Casella.2006.Theoryofpointestimation.
Springer Science & Business Media.
[87] Levesque, H. J. 2017. Common Sense, the Turing Test, and the
Quest for Real AI. MIT University Press.
[88] Levine,S.2017.DeepReinforcementLearning.url:http://rll.berkeley.edu/deeprlcourse/#lecture-videos.
[89] Li,Y.“TopicsinApproximateInference”.url:http://yingzhenli.net/home/pdf/topics_approx_infer.pdf.
[90] Li, Y. and R. E. Turner. 2016. “Rényi divergence variational
inference”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems. 1073–1081.
[91] Loh,P.-L.2017.“OnLowerBoundsforStatisticalLearningThe-
ory”. Entropy. 19(11): 617.
[92] Lunn, D., C. Jackson, N. Best, A. Thomas, and D. Spiegelhal-
ter. 2012. The BUGS book: A practical introduction to Bayesian
analysis. CRC press.
[93] Maaten, L. v. d. and G. Hinton. 2008. “Visualizing data using
t-SNE”. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 9(Nov): 2579–
2605.
[94] MacKay, D. J. 2003. Information theory, inference and learning
algorithms. Cambridge university press.
[95] Maddison, C. J., A. Mnih, and Y. W. Teh. 2016. “The concrete
distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random vari-
ables”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712.
[96] Minka, T. 2005. “Divergence measures and message passing”.
Tech. rep. Technical report, Microsoft Research.
[97] Minsky, M. and S. Papert. 1969. “Perceptrons.”
[98] Mnih,A.andK.Gregor.2014.“Neuralvariationalinferenceand
learning in belief networks”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.0030.
226 References
[99] Mnih, V., K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. 2013. “Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602.
[100] Mohamed, S. and B. Lakshminarayanan. 2016. “Learning in im-
plicit generative models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03483.
[101] Mokhtari, A. and A. Ribeiro. 2017. “First-Order Adaptive Sam-
ple Size Methods to Reduce Complexity of Empirical Risk Min-
imization”. ArXiv e-prints. Sept. arXiv: 1709.00599 [cs.LG].
[102] Montavon, G.,W.Samek,andK.-R.Müller.2017. “Methodsfor
interpreting and understanding deep neural networks”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.07979.
[103] Mott, A., J. Job, J.-R. Vlimant, D. Lidar, and M. Spiropulu.
2017. “Solving a Higgs optimization problem with quantum an-
nealing for machine learning”. Nature. 550(7676): 375.
[104] Murphy, K. P. 2012. Machine learning: a probabilistic perspec-
tive. MIT press.
[105] Nguyen, X., M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan. 2010. “Esti-
matingdivergencefunctionalsandthelikelihoodratiobyconvex
risk minimization”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory.
56(11): 5847–5861.
[106] Nielsen, F. 2011. “Chernoffinformation of exponential families”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1102.2684.
[107] Nowozin, S., B. Cseke, and R. Tomioka. 2016. “f-GAN: Train-
ing generative neuralsamplers usingvariational divergence min-
imization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems. 271–279.
[108] Odena,A.,C.Olah,andJ.Shlens.2016.“Conditionalimagesyn-
thesiswithauxiliaryclassifiergans”.arXivpreprintarXiv:1610.09585.
[109] O’Neil, K. 2016. Weapons of Math Destruction. Penguin Books.
[110] Page, L., S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. 1999. “The
PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.” Tech.
rep. Stanford InfoLab.
[111] Papernot, N., P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. Berkay Ce-
lik, and A. Swami. 2016. “Practical Black-Box Attacks against
MachineLearning”.ArXive-prints.Feb.arXiv:1602.02697 [cs.CR].
References 227
[112] Pearl, J. 2018. “Theoretical Impediments to Machine Learning
WithSevenSparksfromtheCausalRevolution”.ArXiv e-prints.
Jan. arXiv: 1801.04016 [cs.LG].
[113] Pearl, J., M. Glymour, and N. P. Jewell. 2016. Causal inference
in statistics: a primer. John Wiley & Sons.
[114] Pereyra, M., P. Schniter, E. Chouzenoux, J.-C. Pesquet, J.-Y.
Tourneret, A. O. Hero, and S. McLaughlin. 2016. “A survey of
stochastic simulation and optimization methods in signal pro-
cessing”. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing.
10(2): 224–241.
[115] Peters, J., D. Janzing, and B. Scholkopf. 2017. Elements of
Causal Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms. MIT
Press (available on-line).
[116] Pinker, S. 1997. How the Mind Works. Penguin Press Science.
[117] Rabiner, L. and B. Juang. 1986. “An introduction to hidden
Markov models”. IEEE ASSP magazine. 3(1): 4–16.
[118] Raginsky,M.2011.“DirectedinformationandPearl’scausalcal-
culus”.In:Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton),
2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on. IEEE. 958–965.
[119] Raginsky, M., A. Rakhlin, M. Tsao, Y. Wu, and A. Xu. 2016.
“Information-theoretic analysis of stability and bias of learn-
ingalgorithms”.In:Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2016
IEEE. IEEE. 26–30.
[120] Ranganath, R., S. Gerrish, and D. Blei. 2014. “Black box vari-
ational inference”. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 814–
822.
[121] Ranganath, R., L. Tang, L. Charlin, and D. Blei. 2015. “Deep
exponential families”. In: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
762–771.
[122] Rezende,D.J.,S.Mohamed,andD.Wierstra.2014.“Stochastic
backpropagation and approximate inference in deep generative
models”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.4082.
[123] Roth, K., A. Lucchi, S. Nowozin, and T. Hofmann. 2017. “Sta-
bilizing Training of Generative Adversarial Networks through
Regularization”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09367.
228 References
[124] Rudolph, M., F. Ruiz, S. Athey, and D. Blei. 2017. “Structured
Embedding Models for Grouped Data”. ArXiv e-prints. Sept.
arXiv: 1709.10367 [stat.ML].
[125] Rumelhart,D.E.,G.E.Hinton,andR.J.Williams.1988.“Learn-
ingrepresentations by back-propagating errors”.Cognitive mod-
eling. 5(3): 1.
[126] Russel,S.andP. Norvig. 2009. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach. Pearson.
[127] Salakhutdinov, R., A. Mnih, and G. Hinton. 2007. “Restricted
Boltzmann machines for collaborative filtering”. In: Proceedings
of the 24th international conference on Machine learning. ACM.
791–798.
[128] Salimans,T.,J.Ho,X.Chen,andI.Sutskever.2017.“Evolution
strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864.
[129] Samadi, A., T. P. Lillicrap, and D. B. Tweed. 2017. “Deep
Learning with Dynamic Spiking Neurons and Fixed Feedback
Weights”. Neural Computation. 29(3): 578–602.
[130] Scutari, G., F. Facchinei, L. Lampariello, and P. Song. 2014.
“Distributedmethodsforconstrainednonconvexmulti-agentoptimization-
part I: theory”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.4754.
[131] Scutari, M. 2017. “Bayesian Dirichlet Bayesian Network Scores
andtheMaximumEntropyPrinciple”.arXivpreprintarXiv:1708.00689.
[132] Shahriari, B., K. Swersky, Z. Wang, R. P. Adams, and N. de
Freitas. 2016. “Taking the human out of the loop: A review of
bayesian optimization”. Proceedings of the IEEE. 104(1): 148–
175.
[133] Shalev-Shwartz, S. and S. Ben-David. 2014. Understanding ma-
chine learning: From theory to algorithms. Cambridgeuniversity
press.
[134] Shannon, C. E. 1948. “A mathematical theory of communica-
tion”. The Bell System Technical Journal. 27(3): 379–423.
[135] Silver,D.2015.Courseonreinforcementlearning.url:http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/d.silver/web/Teaching.html.
References 229
[136] Smith, S. L., P.-J. Kindermans, and Q. V. Le. 2017. “Don’t
Decay the Learning Rate, Increase the Batch Size”. ArXiv e-
prints. Nov. arXiv: 1711.00489 [cs.LG].
[137] Spectrum, I. Will the Future of AI Learning Depend More on
NatureorNurture? url:https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/robotics/artificial-intelligence/ai-and-psychology-researchers-debate-the-future-of-deep-learning.
[138] Stigler, S. M. 2016. The seven pillars of statistical wisdom. Har-
vard University Press.
[139] Subramaniam, S., T. Palpanas, D. Papadopoulos, V. Kaloger-
aki, and D. Gunopulos. 2006. “Online outlier detection in sen-
sor data using non-parametric models”. In: Proceedings of the
32nd international conference on Very large data bases. VLDB
Endowment. 187–198.
[140] Sugiyama, M., T. Suzuki, and T. Kanamori. 2012. Density ratio
estimation in machine learning. Cambridge University Press.
[141] Sun,Y.,P.Babu,andD.P.Palomar.2017.“Majorization-minimization
algorithms in signal processing, communications, and machine
learning”. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing. 65(3): 794–
816.
[142] Tegmark, M. 2017. Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artifi-
cial Intelligence. Allen Lane.
[143] Thrun,S.1996.“Islearningthen-ththinganyeasierthanlearn-
ing the first?” In: Advances in neural information processing
systems. 640–646.
[144] Times,T.N.Y.1958. NEW NAVY DEVICE LEARNS BY DO-
ING;Psychologist Shows Embryoof Computer DesignedtoRead
andGrowWiser.url:http://www.nytimes.com/1958/07/08/archives/new-navy-device-learns-by-doing-psychologist-shows-embryo-of.html.
[145] Tishby,N.,F.C.Pereira,andW.Bialek.2000.“Theinformation
bottleneck method”. arXiv preprint physics/0004057.
[146] Tsybakov, A. B. 2009. “Introduction to nonparametric estima-
tion”.
[147] Turner, R. E. and M. Sahani. 2011. “Two problems with varia-
tionalexpectationmaximisationfortime-seriesmodels”.Bayesian
Time series models: 115–138.
[148] Uber.Pyro:Deepuniversalprobabilistic programming.url:http://pyro.ai/.
230 References
[149] Venkateswara, H., S. Chakraborty, and S. Panchanathan. 2017.
“Deep-Learning Systems for Domain Adaptation in Computer
Vision: Learning Transferable Feature Representations”. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine. 34(6): 117–129. issn: 1053-5888.
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2017.2740460.
[150] Vincent, P., H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Man-
zagol. 2010. “Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful
representations in a deep network with a local denoising crite-
rion”. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 11(Dec): 3371–
3408.
[151] Wainwright, M. J. and M. I. Jordan. 2008. “Graphical mod-
els,exponentialfamilies,andvariationalinference”.Foundations
and TrendsR in Machine Learning. 1(1–2): 1–305.
(cid:13)
[152] Watt, J.,R.Borhani,andA.Katsaggelos. 2016. Machine Learn-
ing Refined: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications. Cam-
bridge University Press.
[153] Welling, M., M. Rosen-Zvi, and G. E. Hinton. 2005. “Exponen-
tial family harmoniums with an application to information re-
trieval”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
1481–1488.
[154] Wikipedia.AIWinter.url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_winter.
[155] Wikipedia.Conjugatepriors.url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjugate_prior.
[156] Wikipedia.Exponentialfamily.url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_family.
[157] Wilson, A. C., R. Roelofs, M. Stern, N. Srebro, and B. Recht.
2017. “The Marginal Value of Adaptive Gradient Methods in
Machine Learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08292.
[158] Witten, I. H., E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C. J. Pal. 2016. Data
Mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques. Mor-
gan Kaufmann.
[159] Zhang, C., J. Butepage, H. Kjellstrom, and S. Mandt. 2017.
“Advances in Variational Inference”.ArXiv e-prints. Nov. arXiv:
1711.05597 [cs.LG].
References 231
[160] Zhang, Y., J. Duchi, M. I. Jordan, and M. J. Wainwright. 2013.
“Information-theoretic lower bounds for distributed statistical
estimation with communication constraints”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2328–2336.
[161] Zhao,X.and A.H. Sayed. 2015. “Asynchronousadaptation and
learningovernetworks—PartI:Modelingandstabilityanalysis”.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing. 63(4): 811–826.
