Lecture Notes:
Machine Learning for the Sciences
Titus Neupert,1 Mark H Fischer,1 Eliska Greplova,2,3 Kenny Choo,1
and Michael Denner1
1Department of Physics, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
2Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, 2600 GA Delft, The
Netherlands
3Institute for Theoretical Physics, ETH Zurich, CH-8093, Switzerland
June 23, 2022
This lecture notes including exercises are online available at ml-lectures.org.
If you notice mistakes or typos, please report them to comments@ml-lectures.org.
2202
nuJ
22
]hp-pmoc.scisyhp[
2v38840.2012:viXra
Machine Learning for the Sciences
Preface to v2
This is an introductory machine-learning course specifically developed with STEM
students in mind. Our goal is to provide the interested reader with the basics to
employ machine learning in their own projects and to familiarize themself with the
terminology as a foundation for further reading of the relevant literature.
In these lecture notes, we discuss supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement
learning. The notes start with an exposition of machine learning methods with-
out neural networks, such as principle component analysis, t-SNE, clustering, as
well as linear regression and linear classifiers. We continue with an introduction
to both basic and advanced neural-network structures such as dense feed-forward
and conventional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, restricted Boltzmann
machines, (variational) autoencoders, generative adversarial networks. Questions of
interpretabilityarediscussedforlatent-spacerepresentationsandusingtheexamples
of dreaming and adversarial attacks. The final section is dedicated to reinforcement
learning, where we introduce basic notions of value functions and policy learning.
These lecture notes are based on a course taught at ETH Zurich and the Uni-
versity of Zurich for the first time in the fall of 2021 by Titus Neupert and Mark
H Fischer. The lecture notes are further based on a shorter German version of
the lecture notes published in the Springer essential series, ISBN 978-3-658-32268-7,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-32268-7. The content of these lecture notes
together with exercises is available under ml-lectures.org.
This second version of the lecture notes is an updated version for the course
taught at the University of Zurich in spring 2022 by Mark H Fischer. In particular,
the notation should be more consistent, a short discussion of the maximal-likelihood
principle was introduced in Sec. 5.1, and the interpretation of latent-space variables
was extended in Sec. 6.1.
University of Zurich i
Machine Learning for the Sciences CONTENTS
Contents
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Why machine learning for the sciences? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Overview and learning goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.4 Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2 Structuring Data without Neural Networks 8
2.1 Principle component analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2 Kernel PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3 t-SNE as a nonlinear visualization technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4 Clustering algorithms: the example of k-means . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3 Supervised Learning without Neural
Networks 17
3.1 Linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1.1 Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1.2 Regularization and the bias-variance tradeoff . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.3 Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2 Linear classifiers and their extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.1 Binary classification and support vector machines . . . . . . . 25
3.2.2 More than two classes: logistic regression . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4 Supervised Learning with Neural Networks 29
4.1 Computational neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2 A simple network structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4 Simple example: MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5 Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.6 Convolutional neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.6.1 Convolutional layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.6.2 Pooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.6.3 Example: DNA sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.6.4 Example: advanced MNIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.7 Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.7.1 Long short-term memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5 Unsupervised Learning 49
5.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.2 Restricted Boltzmann machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2.1 Training an RBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2.2 Example: signal or image reconstruction/denoising . . . . . . 53
5.3 Training an RNN without supervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.3.1 Example: generating molecules with an RNN . . . . . . . . . 55
5.4 Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.4.1 Variational autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
University of Zurich ii
Machine Learning for the Sciences CONTENTS
5.5 Generative adversarial networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.5.1 Types of generative models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.5.2 The working principle of GANs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.5.3 The cost functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.5.4 Final Remarks on GANs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6 Interpretability of Neural Networks 65
6.1 Interpreting latent-space representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2 Dreaming and the problem of extrapolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.3 Adversarial attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.3.1 Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7 Reinforcement Learning 71
7.1 Exploration versus exploitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.2 Finite Markov decision process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.3 Policies and value functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
7.4 Temporal-difference learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.5 Function approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
8 Concluding remarks 79
University of Zurich iii
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
1 Introduction
1.1 Why machine learning for the sciences?
Machinelearning(ML)andartificialneuralnetworksareeverywhereandchangeour
daily life more profoundly than we might be aware of. However, these concepts are
not a particularly recent invention. Their foundational principles emerged already
in the 1940s. The perceptron, the predecessor of the artificial neuron, the basic unit
of many neural networks to date, was invented by Frank Rosenblatt in 1958, and
even cast into a hardware realization by IBM.
It then took half a century for these ideas to become technologically relevant.
Now, artificial intelligence based on neural-network algorithms has become an in-
tegral part of data processing with widespread applications. Famous milestones
include image based tasks such as recognizing a cat and distinguishing it from a dog
(2012), the generation of realistic human faces (2018), but also sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) tasks, such as language translation, or developing strategies to play and
beat the best human players in games from chess to Go.
The reason for ML’s tremendous success is twofold. First, the availability of big
and structured data caters to machine-learning applications. Second, while deep
(feed-forward) networks (made from many “layers” of artificial neurons) with many
variational parameters are tremendously more powerful than few-layer ones, it only
recently, in the last decade or so, became feasible to train such networks. This big
leap is known as the “deep learning revolution”.
Machine learning refers to algorithms that infer information from data in an im-
plicitway. Ifthealgorithmsareinspiredbythefunctionalityofneuralactivityinthe
brain, the term cognitive or neural computing is used. Artificial neural networks re-
fertoaspecific, albeitmostbroadlyused, ansatzformachinelearning. Anotherfield
that concerns iteself with inferring information from data is statistics. In that sense,
both machine learning and statistics have the same goal. However, the way this goal
is achieved is markedly different: while statistics uses insights from mathematics to
extract information in a well defined and deterministic manner, machine learning
aims at optimizing a variational function using available data through learning.
The mathematical foundations of machine learning with neural networks are
poorly understood: we do not know why deep learning works. Nevertheless, there
are some exact results for special cases. For instance, certain classes of neural
networks are a complete basis of smooth functions, that is, when equipped with
enough variational parameters, they can approximate any smooth high-dimensional
function with arbitrarily precision. Other variational functions with this property
we commonly use are Taylor or Fourier series (with the coefficients as “variational”
parameters). We can think of neural networks as a class or variational functions,
for which the parameters can be efficiently optimized—learned—with respect to a
desired objective.
As an example, this objective can be the classification of handwritten digits from
‘0’to‘9’. Theinputtotheneuralnetworkwouldbeanimageofthenumber, encoded
in a vector of grayscale values. The output is a probability distribution saying how
likely it is that the image shows a ‘0’, ‘1’, ‘2’, and so on. The variational parameters
of the network are adjusted until it accomplishes that task well. This is a classical
example of supervised learning. To perform the network optimization, we need data
University of Zurich 1
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
Figure 1: Datasets for image classifications: Examples of the digits from the
handwritten MNIST dataset (top row) and images from the Galaxy Zoo project
(bottom row).
consisting of input data (the pixel images) and labels (the integer number shown on
the respective image).
Our hope is that the optimized network also recognizes handwritten digits it has
not seen during the learning. This property of a network is called generalization. It
stands in opposition to a tendency called overfitting, which means that the network
has learned specificities of the data set it was presented with, rather than the ab-
stract features necessary to identify the respective digit. An illustrative example of
overfitting is fitting a polynomial of degree 9 to 10 data points, which will always be
a perfect fit. Does this mean that this polynomial best characterizes the behavior of
the measured system? Of course not. Fighting overfitting and creating algorithms
that generalize well are key challenges in machine learning. We will study several
approaches to achieve this goal.
Handwritten digit recognition has become one of the standard benchmark prob-
lems in the field. Why so? The reason is simple: there exists a very good and freely
available data set for it, the MNIST database 1, see top row of Fig. 1. This curious
fact highlights an important aspect of machine learning: it is all about data. The
most efficient way to improve machine learning results is to provide more and better
data. Thus, one should keep in mind that despite the widespread applications, ma-
chine learning is not the hammer for every nail. Machine learning is most beneficial
if large and balanced data sets in a machine-readable way are available, such that
the algorithm can learn all aspects of the problem equally.
This lecture is an introduction specifically targeting the use of machine learning
in different domains of science. In scientific research, we see a vastly increasing
numberofapplicationsofmachinelearning, mirroringthedevelopmentsinindustrial
technology. With that, machine learning presents itself as a universal new tool for
the exact sciences, standing side-by-side with methods such as calculus, traditional
statistics, and numerical simulations. This poses the question, where in the scientific
workflow, summerized in Fig. 2, these novel methods are best employed.
While machine learning has been used in various fields that have been dealing
with ’big data’ problems—famous examples include the search of the Higgs boson in
high-energy collision data or finding and classifying galaxies in astronomy—the last
years have witnessed a host of new applications in the sciences: from high-accuracy
1http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist
University of Zurich 2
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
Observation
designexperiment
aquiredata
analysedata
Prediction Model building
ifmymodelsarecorrect, abstractknowledge
then... formulatequestions
developtheories
Figure 2: Simplified scientific workflow. From observations, via abstraction to
building and testing hypothesis or laws, to finally making predictions
precipitation prediction 2 to guiding human intuition in mathematics 3 and protein-
folding simulations 4. The high-accuracy protein-folding prediction achieved with
machine learning was named last years Science’s breakthrough of the year and one
of Nature’s ‘Seven technologies to watch in 2022’.
Once a specific task has been identified, applying machine learning to the sci-
ences does hold its very specific challenges: (i) scientific data has often very partic-
ular structure, such as the nearly perfect periodicity in an image of a crystal; (ii)
typically, we have specific knowledge about correlations in the data which should be
reflectedinamachinelearninganalysis; (iii)wewanttounderstandwhyaparticular
algorithm works, seeking a fundamental insight into mechanisms and laws of nature,
in other words, developing models; (iv) in the sciences we are used to algorithms
and laws that provide deterministic answers while machine learning is intrinsically
probabilistic - there is no absolute certainty. Nevertheless, quantitative precision
is paramount in many areas of science and thus a critical benchmark for machine
learning methods.
A note on the concept of a model
In both machine learning and the sciences, models play a crucial role. However,
it is important to recognize the difference in meaning: In the (natural) sciences,
a model is a conceptual representation of a phenomenon. A scientific model does
not try to represent the whole world, but only a small part of it. A model is thus
a simplification of the phenomenon and can be both a theoretical construct, for
example the ideal gas model or the Bohr model of the atom, or an experimental
simplification, such as a small version of an airplane in a wind channel.
In machine learning, on the other hand, we most often use a complicated vari-
ational function, for example a neural network, to try to approximate a statistical
model. But what is a model in statistics? Colloquially speaking, a statistical model
comprises a set of statistical assumptions which allow us to calculate the probability
P(x) of any event x. The statistical model does not correspond to the true dis-
tribution of all possible events, it simply approximates the distribution. Scientific
and statistical models thus share an important property: neither claims to be a
representation of reality.
2Ravuri et al., Nature 597, 672 (2021)
3Davis et al., Nature 600, 70 (2021)
4Jumper et al., 596, 7873 (2021)
University of Zurich 3
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
1.2 Overview and learning goals
This lecture is an introduction to basic machine learning algorithms for scientists
and students of the sciences. After this lecture, you will
• understand the basic terminology of the field,
• be able to apply the most fundamental machine learning algorithms,
• understand the principles of supervised and unsupervised learning and why it
is so successful,
• know various architectures of artificial neural networks and be able to select
the ones suitable for your problems,
• know how we find out what the machine learning algorithm uses to solve a
problem.
The field of machine learning is full of lingo which to the uninitiated obscures
what is at the core of the methods. Being a field in constant transformation, new
terminology is being introduced at a fast pace. Our aim is to cut through slang
with mathematically precise and concise formulations in order to demystify machine
learning concepts for someone with an understanding of calculus and linear algebra.
As mentioned above, data is at the core of most machine learning approaches
discussed in this lecture. With raw data in many cases very complex and extremely
high dimensional, it is often crucial to first understand the data better and reduce
their dimensionality. Simple algorithms that can be used before turning to the often
heavy machinery of neural networks will be discussed in the next section, Sec. 2
The machine learning algorithms we will focus on most can generally be divided
into two classes of algorithms, namely discriminative and generative algorithms as
illustrated in Fig. 3. Examples of discriminative tasks include classification prob-
lems, such as the aforementioned digit classification or the classification into solid,
liquid and gas phases given some experimental observables. Similarly, regression,
in other words estimating relationships between variables, is a discriminative prob-
lem. Put differently, we try to approximate the conditional probability distribution
P(y|x) of some variable y (the label) given some input data x. As data is provided
in the form of input and target data for most of these tasks, these algorithms usually
employ supervised learning. Discriminative algorithms are most straight-forwardly
applicable in the sciences and we will discuss them in Secs. 3 and 4.
Generativealgorithms, on the otherhand, model a probability distributionP(x).
These approaches are—once trained—in principle more powerful, since we can also
learn the joint probability distribution P(x,y) of both the data x and the labels
y and infer the conditional probability of y. Still, the more targeted approach of
discriminative learning is better suited for many problems. However, generative
algorithms are useful in the natural sciences, as we can sample from a known prob-
ability distribution, for example for image denoising, or when trying to find new
compounds/molecules resembling known ones with given properties. These algo-
rithms are discussed in Sec. 5.
The promise of artificial intelligence may trigger unreasonable expectations in
the sciences. After all, scientific knowledge generation is one of the most complex
intellectual processes. Computer algorithms are certainly far from achieving any-
thing on that level of complexity and will in the near future not formulate new laws
of nature independently. Nevertheless, researchers study how machine learning can
University of Zurich 4
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
probability distribution P
conditionalprobabilityP(y|x) probabilityP(x),P(x,y)
discriminative/supervised generative/unsupervised
withoutneuralnetworks(Sec.3) withneuralnetworks(Sec.5)
•regression •restrictedBoltzmannmachine
•linearclassifier •(variational)autoencoder
•recursiveneuralnetworkII
withneuralnetworks(Sec.4) •generativeadversarialnetworks
•simpleneuralnetwork
•convolutionalneuralnetwork
(geometry)
•recursiveneuralnetwork
(sequence)
interpretabilityandvulnerability(Sec.6)
additionaltopics
dimensionalreduction(Sec.2) reinforcementlearning(Sec.7)
•PCA
•t-SNE
Figure 3: Overview over the plan of the lecture from the perspective of learning
probability distributions.
University of Zurich 5
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
help with individual segments of the scientific workflow (Fig. 2). While the type of
abstraction needed to formulate Newton’s laws of classical mechanics seems incred-
ibly complex, neural networks are very good at implicit knowledge representation.
To understand precisely how they achieve certain tasks, however, is not an easy
undertaking. We will discuss this question of interpretability in Sec. 6.
A third class of algorithms, which does not neatly fit the framework of approxi-
matingastatisticalmodelandthusthedistinctionintodiscriminativeandgenerative
algorithms is known as reinforcement learning. Instead of approximating a statisti-
cal model, reinforcement learning tries to optimize strategies (actions) for achieving
a given task. Reinforcement learning has gained a lot of attention with Google’s
AlphaGo Zero, a computer program that beat the best Go players in the world. As
an example for an application in the sciences, reinforcement learning can be used to
decide on what experimental configuration to perform next or to control a complex
experiment. While the whole topic is beyond the scope of this lecture, we will give
an introduction to the basic concepts of reinforcement learning in Sec. 7.
A final note on the practice of learning. While the machine learning machinery is
extremely powerful, using an appropriate architecture and the right training details,
captured in what are called hyperparameters, is crucial for its successful application.
Thoughthereareattemptstolearnasuitablemodelandallhyperparametersaspart
of the overall learning process, this is not a simple task and requires immense com-
putational resources. A large part of the machine learning success is thus connected
to the experience of the scientist using the appropriate algorithms. We strongly
encourage solving the accompanying exercises carefully and taking advantage of the
exercise classes.
1.3 Resources
While it may seem that implementing ML tasks is computationally challenging,
actually almost any ML task one might be interested in can be done with relatively
few lines of code simply by relying on external libraries or mathematical computing
systems such as Mathematica or Matlab. At the moment, most of the external
libraries are written for the Python programming language. Here are some useful
Python libraries:
1. TensorFlow. Developed by Google, Tensorflow is one of the most popular
and flexible library for machine learning with complex models, with full GPU
support. Keras, a high-level API for TensorFlow, further greatly simplifies
employing even complicated models.
2. PyTorch. Developed by Facebook, Pytorch is the biggest rival library to
Tensorflow, with pretty much the same functionalities.
3. Scikit-Learn. Whereas TensorFlow and PyTorch are catered for deep learn-
ing practitioners, Scikit-Learn provides much of the traditional machine learn-
ing tools, including linear regression and PCA.
4. Pandas. Modern machine learning is largely reliant on big datasets. This
library provides many helpful tools to handle these large datasets.
University of Zurich 6
Machine Learning for the Sciences 1 INTRODUCTION
1.4 Prerequisites
This course is aimed at students of the (natural) sciences with a basic mathemat-
ics education and some experience in programming. In particular, we assume the
following prerequisites:
• Basic knowledge of calculus and linear algebra.
• Rudimentary knowledge of statistics and probability theory (advantageous).
• Basic knowledge of a programming language. For the teaching assignments,
you are free to choose your preferable one. The solutions will typically be
distributed in Python in the form of Jupyter notebooks.
Please, don’t hesitate to ask questions if any notions are unclear.
1.5 References
For further reading, we recommend the following books:
• ML without neural networks: The Elements of Statistical Learning, T.
Hastie, R. Tisbshirani, and J. Friedman (Springer)
• ML with neural networks: Neural Networks and Deep Learning, M.Nielson
(http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com)
• Deep Learning Theory: Deep Learning, I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio and A.
Courville (http://www.deeplearningbook.org)
• Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement Learning, R. S. Sutton and A. G.
Barto (MIT Press)
University of Zurich 7
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
2 Structuring Data without Neural Net-
works
Deep learning with neural networks is very much at the forefront of the recent
renaissance in machine learning. However, machine learning is not synonymous with
neural networks. There is a wealth of machine learning approaches without neural
networks, and the boundary between them and conventional statistical analysis is
not always sharp.
It is a common misconception that neural-network techniques would always out-
perform these approaches. In fact, in some cases, a simple linear method could
achieve faster and better results. Even when we might eventually want to use a
deep network, simpler approaches may help to understand the problem we are fac-
ing and the specificity of the data so as to better formulate our machine learning
strategy. In this chapter, we shall explore machine-learning approaches without the
use of neural networks. This will further allow us to introduce basic concepts and
the general form of a machine-learning workflow.
2.1 Principle component analysis
Attheheartofanymachinelearningtaskisdata. Inordertochoosethemostappro-
priate machine learning strategy, it is essential that we understand the data we are
workingwith. However, veryoften, wearepresentedwithadatasetcontainingmany
types of information, called features of the data. Such a dataset is also described as
being high-dimensional. Techniques that extract information from such a dataset
are broadly summarised as high-dimensional inference. For instance, we could be
interested in predicting the progress of diabetes in patients given features such as
age, sex, body mass index, or average blood pressure. Extremely high-dimensional
data can occur in biology, where we might want to compare gene expression pattern
in cells. Given a multitude of features, it is neither easy to visualise the data nor
pick out the most relevant information. This is where principle component analysis
(PCA) can be helpful.
Very briefly, PCA is a systematic way to find out which feature or combination
of features vary the most across the data samples. We can think of PCA as ap-
proximating the data with a high-dimensional ellipsoid, where the principal axes of
this ellipsoid correspond to the principal components. A feature, which is almost
constant across the samples, in other words has a very short principal axis, might
not be very useful. PCA then has two main applications: (1) It helps to visualise
the data in a low dimensional space and (2) it can reduce the dimensionality of the
input data to an amount that a more complex algorithm can handle.
PCA algorithm
Given a dataset of m samples with n data features, we can arrange our data in the
form of a m by n matrix X where the element x corresponds to the value of the
ij
jth data feature of the ith sample. We will also use the feature vector x for all the
i
n features of one sample i = 1,...,m. The vector x can take values in the feature
i
space, for example x ∈ Rn. Going back to our diabetes example, we might have 10
i
data features. Furthermore if we are given information regarding 100 patients, our
University of Zurich 8
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
data matrix X would have 100 rows and 10 columns.
The procedure to perform PCA can then be described as follows:
Algorithm 1: Principle Component Analysis
1. Center the data by subtracting from each column the mean of that col-
umn,
1 m
x 7→ x − X x . (2.1)
i i i
m
i=1
This ensures that the mean of each data feature is zero.
2. Form the n by n (unnormalized) covariance matrix
m
C = XTX = X x xT. (2.2)
i i
i=1
3. Diagonalize the matrix to the form C = XTX = WΛWT, where the
columns of W are the normalized eigenvectors, or principal components,
and Λ is a diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues. It will be helpful
to arrange the eigenvalues from largest to smallest.
4. Pick the l largest eigenvalues λ ,...λ , l ≤ n and their corresponding
1 l
eigenvectors v ...v . Construct the n by l matrix Wf = [v ...v ].
1 l 1 l
5. Dimensional reduction: Transform the data matrix as
Xf = XWf. (2.3)
The transformed data matrix Xf now has dimensions m by l.
We have thus reduced the dimensionality of the data from n to l. Notice that
there are actually two things happening: First, of course, we now only have l data
features. But second, the l data features are new features and not simply a selec-
tion of the original data. Rather, they are a linear combination of them. Using our
diabetes example again, one of the “new” data features could be the sum of the aver-
age blood pressure and the body mass index. These new features are automatically
extracted by the algorithm.
Butwhydidwehavetogothroughsuchanelaborateproceduretodothisinstead
of simply removing a couple of features? The reason is that we want to maximize
the variance in our data. We will give a precise definition of the variance later in
the chapter, but briefly the variance just means the spread of the data. Using PCA,
we have essentially obtained l “new” features which maximise the spread of the data
when plotted as a function of this feature. We illustrate this with an example.
Example: The Iris dataset
Let us consider a very simple dataset with just 2 data features. We have data, from
the Irisdataset 5, a well knowndataset on 3different species offlowers. We aregiven
information about the petal length and petal width. Since there are just 2 features,
5https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/iris
University of Zurich 9
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
2
0
0 2 4 6
petal length [cm]
]mc[
htdiw
latep
2
setosa
versicolor
virginica 0
2
−
4 2 0 2 4
− −
∆l [cm]
p
]mc[
w∆
p
2
0
2
−
4 2 0 2 4
− −
w
1
w 2
Figure 4: PCA on Iris Dataset. The original data (left) is first centered (center),
and then, PCA ’fits an ellipsoid around the data’ to extract the new feature axes
(right).
it is easy to visualise the data. In Fig. 4, we show how the data is transformed under
the PCA algorithm.
Notice that there is no dimensional reduction here since l = n. In this case, the
PCA algorithm amounts simply to a rotation of the original data. However, it still
produces 2 new features which are orthogonal linear combinations of the original
features: petal length and petal width, i.e.
w = 0.922×petal length+0.388×petal width,
1 (2.4)
w = −0.388×petal length+0.922×petal width.
2
We see very clearly that the first new feature w has a much larger variance than the
1
second feature w . In fact, if we are interested in distinguishing the three different
2
species of flowers, as in a classification task, its almost sufficient to use only the
data feature with the largest variance, w . This is the essence of (PCA) dimensional
1
reduction.
Finally, it is important to note that it is not always true that the feature with
the largest variance is the most relevant for the task and it is possible to construct
counter examples where the feature with the least variance contains all the useful
information. However, PCA is often a good guiding principle and can yield inter-
esting insights into the data. Most importantly, it is also interpretable, i.e., not only
does it separate the data, but we also learn which linear combination of features
can achieve this separation. We will see that for many neural network algorithms,
in contrast, a lack of interpretability is a central issue.
2.2 Kernel PCA
PCA performs a linear transformation on our data. However, there are cases where
such a transformation is unable to produce any meaningful result. Consider for
instance the fictitious dataset with 2 classes and 2 data features as shown on the
left of Fig. 5. We see by naked eye that it should be possible to separate this data
well, for instance by the distance of the datapoint from the origin, but it is also clear
that a linear function cannot be used to compute it. In this case, it can be helpful
to consider a non-linear extension of PCA, known as kernel PCA.
The basic idea of this method is to apply to the data x ∈ Rn a chosen non-linear
vector-valued transformation function Φ(x) with
Φ : Rn → RN, (2.5)
University of Zurich 10
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
−
1.0
−
1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
− −
f
1
f 2
1.0
0.5
0.0
original
0.5
−
1.0
−
1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
− −
w
1
w 2
PCA
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
−
1.0
−
1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
− −
w
1
w 2
kernelPCA
Figure 5: Kernel PCA versus PCA. For kernel PCA, an RBF kernel with γ = 10
was used.
whichisamapfromtheoriginaln-dimensionalspace(correspondingtothenoriginal
data features) to a N-dimensional feature space. By embedding the original data in
this new space, we hope to be able to separate the data with a linear transformation,
in other words, kernel PCA simply involves performing the standard PCA on the
transformed data Φ(x). Here, we will assume that the transformed data is centered,
i.e.,
XΦ(x ) = 0 (2.6)
i
i
to have simpler formulas.
In practice, when N is large, it is not efficient or even possible to explicitly
perform the transformation Φ. Instead we can make use of a method known as the
kerneltrick. RecallthatinstandardPCA,theprimaryaimistofindtheeigenvectors
and eigenvalues of the covariance matrix C in Eq. (2.2) . In the case of kernel PCA,
this matrix becomes
m
C = X Φ(x )Φ(x )T, (2.7)
i i
i=1
with the eigenvalue equation
m
X Φ(x )Φ(x )Tv = λ v . (2.8)
i i j j j
i=1
University of Zurich 11
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
By writing the eigenvectors v as a linear combination of the transformed data
j
features
m
v = X a Φ(x ), (2.9)
j ji i
i=1
we see that finding the eigenvectors is equivalent to finding the coefficients a . On
ji
substituting this form back into Eq. (2.8), we find
m " m # " m #
X Φ(x )Φ(x )T X a Φ(x ) = λ X a Φ(x ) . (2.10)
i i ji j j ji i
i=1 i=1 i=1
By multiplying both sides of the equation by Φ(x )T we arrive at
k
m " m # " m #
X Φ(x )TΦ(x )Φ(x )T X a Φ(x ) = λ Φ(x )T X a Φ(x )
k i i jl l j k jl l
i=1 l=1 l=1
m m m
Xh Φ(x )TΦ(x ) iX a h Φ(x )TΦ(x ) i = λ X a h Φ(x )TΦ(x ) i (2.11)
k i jl i l j jl k l
i=1 l=1 l=1
m m m
X K(x ,x )X a K(x ,x ) = λ X a K(x ,x ),
k i jl i l j jl k l
i=1 l=1 l=1
whereK(x,y) = Φ(x)TΦ(y)isknownasthekernel. Thus, weseethatifwedirectly
specifythekernelswecanavoidexplicitperformingthetransformationΦ. Inmatrix
form, we find the eigenvalue equation K2a = λ Ka , which simplifies to
j j j
Ka = λ a . (2.12)
j j j
Note that this simplification requires λ 6= 0, which will be the case for relevant
j
principle components. (If λ = 0, then the corresponding eigenvectors would be
j
irrelevant components to be discarded.) After solving the above equation and ob-
taining the coefficients a , the kernel PCA transformation is then simply given by
jl
the overlap with the eigenvectors v , namely
j
m m
x → Φ(x) → y = vTΦ(x) = X a Φ(x )TΦ(x) = X a K(x ,x), (2.13)
j j ji i ji i
i=1 i=1
where once again the explicit Φ transformation is avoided.
Common choices for the kernel are the polynomial kernel
K (x,y) = (xTy +c)d (2.14)
poly
ortheGaussiankernel, alsoknownastheradialbasisfunction(RBF)kernel, defined
by
(cid:16) (cid:17)
K (x,y) = exp −γkx−yk2 , (2.15)
RBF
q
where c, d, and γ are tunable parameters and kx − yk = P (x −y )2 denotes
j j j
the Euclidian distance. Using the RBF kernel, we compare the result of kernel PCA
with that of standard PCA, as shown on the right of Fig. (5). It is clear that kernel
PCA leads to a meaningful separation of the data while standard PCA completely
fails.
University of Zurich 12
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
2.3 t-SNE as a nonlinear visualization technique
We studied (kernel) PCA as an example for a method that reduces the dimensional-
ity of a dataset and makes features apparent by which data points can be efficiently
distinguished. Often, it is desirable to more clearly cluster similar data points and
visualize this clustering in a low (two- or three-) dimensional space. We focus our
attention on a relatively recent algorithm (from 2008) that has proven very perfor-
mant. It goes by the name t-distributed stochastic neighborhood embedding (t-SNE).
Unlike PCA, t-SNE is a stochastic algorithm, in other words applying the algorithm
twice will lead to different results.
Thebasicideaistothinkofthedata(images, forinstance)asobjectsx inavery
i
high-dimensional space and characterize their relation by the Euclidean distance
||x − x || between them. These pairwise distances are mapped to a probability
i j
distribution p . The same is done for the distances ky −y k of the images of the
ij i j
data points y in the low-dimensional target space. Their probability distribution is
i
denotedq . Themappingisoptimizedbychangingthelocationsy soastominimize
ij i
the distance between the two probability distributions. Let us substantiate in the
following this intuition with concrete formulas.
In order to introduce the probability distribution in the space of data points, we
first introduce the conditional probabilities
exp(−kx −x k2/2σ2)
p = i j i , (2.16)
j|i P exp(−kx −x k2/2σ2)
k6=i i k i
where the choice of variances σ will be explained momentarily and p = 0 by
i i|i
definition. DistancesarethusturnedintoaGaussiandistributionandtheprobability
measureshowlikelythepointx wouldchoosex asitsneighbor. Fortheprobability
j i
distribution p we then use the symmetrized version (joint probability distribution)
ij
p +p
p = i|j j|i . (2.17)
ij 2m
Note that p 6= p while p = p . The symmetrized p ensures that P p >
j|i i|j ji ij ij j ij
1/(2m), so that each data point makes a significant contribution and outliers are
not simply discarded in the minimization.
Theprobabilitydistributioninthetargetspaceischosentobeaso-calledStudent
t-distribution
(1+ky −y k2)−1
q = i j . (2.18)
ij P (1+ky −y k2)−1
k6=l k l
This choice has several advantages over the Gaussian choice in the space of the orig-
inal data points: (i) it is symmetric upon interchanging i and j, (ii) it is numerically
more efficiently evaluated because there are no exponentials, (iii) it has ’fatter’ tails
which helps to produce more meaningful maps in the lower dimensional space.
In order to minimize the distance between p and q , we have to introduce a
ij ij
(real-valued) measure for the similarity between the two probability distributions.
We will then use this measure as a so-called loss function or cost function, which we
aim to minimize by adjusting the y’s 6. Here, we choose the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
6NotethatwecanalsoframePCAasaoptimizationproblem,whereweareinterestedinfinding
the linear combination of features that maximize the variance. Unlike in t-SNE, this optimization
can be done analytically, see exercises
University of Zurich 13
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
Figure 6: PCA vs. t-SNE Application of both methods on 5000 samples from
the MNIST handwritten digit dataset. We see that perfect clustering cannot be
achieved with either method, but t-SNE delivers the much better result.
divergence
p
L({y }) = XX p log ij 7, (2.19)
i ij q
i j ij
which we will frequently encounter during this lecture. An important property of
the KL divergence is that it is non-negative 8.
The minimization of L({y }) with respect to the positions y can be achieved
i i
with a variety of methods. In the simplest case it can be gradient descent, which we
will discuss in more detail in a later chapter. As the name suggests, gradient descent
follows the direction of largest gradient of the cost function to find the minimum.
To this end it is useful that these gradients can be calculated in a simple form
∂L
= 4X(p −q )(y −y )(1+||y −y ||2)−1. (2.20)
∂y ij ij i j i j
i j
Finally, let us discuss the choice of the σ in Eq. (2.16). Intuitively, we want
i
to choose σ such that distances are equally well resolved in both dense and sparse
i
regions of the dataset. As a consequence, we choose smaller values of σ in dense
i
regions as compared to sparser regions. More formally, a given value of σ induces
i
a probability distribution P over all the other data points. This distribution has
i
an entropy (here we use the Shannon entropy, in general it is a measure for the
“uncertainty” represented by the distribution)
H(P ) = − X p log p . (2.21)
i j|i 2 j|i
j
The value of H(P ) increases as σ increases, in other words the more uncertainty is
i i
added to the distances. The algorithm searches for the σ that result in a P with
i i
fixed perplexity
Perp(P ) = 2H(Pi). (2.22)
i
7In general, we use log for the natural logarithm. In case of a different base, this is denoted as
log .
a
8Importantly, while the KL divergence is a measure for the similarity of two probability dis-
tributions, it does not define a metric on the space of probability distributions, but, as the name
suggests, a divergence. Amongst other things, the KL divergence is not symmetric.
University of Zurich 14
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
The target value of the perplexity is chosen a priory and is the main parameter that
controls the outcome of the t-SNE algorithm. It can be interpreted as a smooth
measure for the effective number of neighbors. Typical values for the perplexity are
between 5 and 50.
By now, t-SNE is implemented as standard in many packages. They involve
some extra tweaks that force points y to stay close together at the initial steps
i
of the optimization and create a lot of empty space. This facilitates the moving
of larger clusters in early stages of the optimization until a globally good arrange-
ment is found. If the dataset is very high-dimensional it is advisable to perform an
initial dimensionality reduction (to somewhere between 10 and 100 dimensions, for
instance) with PCA before running t-SNE.
While t-SNE is a very powerful clustering technique, it has its limitations. (i)
The target dimension should be 2 or 3, for much larger dimensions the ansatz for q
ij
is not suitable. (ii) If the dataset is intrinsically high-dimensional (so that also the
PCA pre-processing fails), t-SNE may not be a suitable technique. (iii) Due to the
stochastic nature of the optimization, results are not reproducible. The result may
end up looking very different when the algorithm is initialized with some slightly
different initial values for y .
i
2.4 Clustering algorithms: the example of k-means
All of PCA, kernel-PCA and t-SNE may or may not deliver a visualization of the
dataset, where clusters emerge. They all leave it to the observer to identify these
possible clusters. In this section, we want to introduce an algorithm that actually
clusters data, in other words, it will assign any data point to one of k clusters. Here,
the desired number of clusters k is fixed a priori by us. This is a weakness but
may be compensated by running the algorithm with different values of k and assess,
where the performance is best.
We will exemplify a simple iterative clustering algorithm that goes by the name
k-means. The key idea is that data points are assigned to clusters such that the
squared distances between the data points belonging to one cluster and the centroid
of the cluster is minimized. The centroid is defined as the arithmetic mean of all
data points in a cluster.
This description already suggests that we will again minimize a loss function
(or maximize an expectation function, which just differs in the overall sign from
the loss function). Suppose we are given an assignment of datapoints x to clusters
i
j = 1,··· ,k that is represented by

 1, x in cluster j,
w = i (2.23)
ij  0, x i not in cluster j.
Then the loss function is given by
m k
L({w };{x }) = XX w ||x −µ ||2, (2.24)
ij i ij i j
i=1j=1
with the centroid
P w x
µ = i ij i . (2.25)
j P w
i ij
University of Zurich 15
Machine Learning for the Sciences 2 STRUCTURING DATA
90
80
70
60
50
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0
eruption time [minutes]
]setunim[
emit
tiaw
Figure 7: K-means Example of clustering on a dataset including two features on
the Old Faithful geyser: duration of eruption and waiting time between eruption
suggesting two distinct types of eruptions. The red crosses denotes the centroid
location.
Naturally, we want to minimize the loss function with respect to the assignment
w . However, a change in this assignment also changes µ . For this reason, it is
ij j
natural to use an iterative algorithm and divide each update step into two parts.
The first part updates the w according to
ij

 1, if j = argmin ||x −µ ||,
w = l i l (2.26)
ij  0, else ,
in other words, each data point is assigned to the nearest cluster centroid. The
second part is a recalculation of the centroids according to Eq. (2.25).
The algorithm is initialized by choosing at random k distinct data points as
initial positions of the centroids. Then one repeats the above two-part steps until
convergence, meaning until the w do not change anymore. Figure 7 shows an
ij
example of clustering on a dataset for the Old Faithful geyser 9.
A few things to keep in mind when using k-means: First, in this algorithm we
use the Euclidean distance measure k·k. It is advisable to standardize the data such
that each feature has mean zero and a standard deviation of one when averaging
over all data points. Otherwise—if some features are overall numerically smaller
than others—, the differences in various features may be weighted very differently
by the algorithm. Second, the results of k-means may depend on the initialization.
One should re-run the algorithm with a few different initializations to avoid running
into bad local minima. Finally, k-means assumes spherical clusters by construction.
If the actual cluster form is very far from such a spherical form, k-means fails to
assign the points correctly.
Applications of k-means are manifold: in economy they include marked seg-
mentation, in science any classification problem such as that of phases of matter,
document clustering, image compression (color reduction), etc.. In general, it helps
to build intuition about the data at hand.
9https://www.stat.cmu.edu/ larry/all-of-statistics/=data/faithful.dat
University of Zurich 16
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
3 Supervised Learning without Neural
Networks
Supervised learning is the term for a machine learning task, where we are given
a dataset consisting of input-output pairs {(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )} and our task is
1 1 m m
to “learn” a function which maps input to output f : x 7→ y. Here we chose a
vector-valued input x and only a single, real number as output y, but in principle
also the output can be vector valued. The output data that we have is called the
ground truth and sometimes also referred to as “labels” of the input. In contrast
to supervised learning, the algorithms presented so far were unsupervised, because
they relied on input-data {x } only, without any ground truth or output data.
i
Within the scope of supervised learning, there are two main types of tasks:
Classification and Regression. In a classification task, our output y is a discrete
variable corresponding to a classification category. An example of such a task would
be to distinguish different galaxy types from images or find stars with a planetary
system (exoplanets) from those without given time series of images of such objects.
On the other hand, in a regression problem, the output y is a continuous number
or vector. For example predicting the quantity of rainfall based on meteorological
data from the previous days, the area a forest fire destroys, or how long a geyser
eruption will last given the wait time.
In this section, we first familiarize ourselves with linear methods for achieving
these tasks. Neural networks, in contrast, are used as a non-linear ansatz for super-
vised classification and regression tasks.
3.1 Linear regression
Linear regression, as the name suggests, simply means to fit a linear model to a
dataset. Consideradatasetconsistingofinput-outputpairs{(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )},
1 1 m m
where the inputs are n-component vectors xT = (x ,x ,...,x ) and the output y is
1 2 n
a real-valued number. The linear model then takes the form
n
f(x|β) = β +X β x (3.1)
0 j j
j=1
or in matrix notation
f(x|β) = x˜Tβ (3.2)
where x˜T = (1,x ,x ,...,x ) and β = (β ,...,β )T are (n + 1) dimensional row
1 2 n 0 n
vectors.
ˆ ˆ
The aim then is to find parameters β such that f(x|β) is a good estimator for
the output value y. In order to quantify what it means to be a “good” estimator,
ˆ
we again need to specify a loss function L(β). The good set of parameters β is then
the minimizer of this loss function
ˆ
β = argminL(β). (3.3)
β
There are many, inequivalent, choices for this loss function. For our purpose, we
University of Zurich 17
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
choose the loss function to be the residual sum of squares (RSS) defined as
m
RSS(β) = X[y −f(x |β)]2
i i
i=1
(3.4)
 2
m n
= X y −β − X β x ,
 i 0 j ij
i=1 j=1
where the sum runs over the m samples of the dataset. This loss function is some-
times also called the L2-loss and can be seen as a measure of the distance between
the output values from the dataset y and the corresponding predictions f(x |β).
i i
It is convenient to define the m by (n + 1) data matrix Xf , each row of which
corresponds to an input sample x˜T, as well as the output vector Y T = (y ,...,y ).
i 1 m
With this notation, Eq. (3.4) can be expressed succinctly as a matrix equation
RSS(β) = (Y −Xfβ)T(Y −Xfβ). (3.5)
The minimum of RSS(β) can be easily solved by considering the partial derivatives
with respect to β, i.e.,
∂RSS
= −2Xf T(Y −Xfβ),
∂β
(3.6)
∂2RSS
= 2Xf TXf.
∂β∂βT
At the minimum, ∂RSS = 0 and ∂2RSS is positive-definite. Assuming XfTXf is full-
∂β ∂β∂βT
ˆ
rank and hence invertible, we can obtain the solution β as
∂RSS(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) = 0,
∂β (cid:12)
(cid:12) β=βˆ
(3.7)
ˆ
=⇒ Xf TXfβ = Xf TY ,
ˆ
=⇒ β = (Xf TXf )−1Xf TY .
If XfTXf is not full-rank, which can happen if certain data features are perfectly
correlated (e.g., x = 2x ), the solution to XfTXfβ = XfTY can still be found, but it
1 3
would not be unique. Note that the RSS is not the only possible choice for the loss
function and a different choice would lead to a different solution.
What we have done so far is uni-variate linear regression, that is linear regres-
sion where the output y is a single, real-valued number. The generalization to the
multi-variate case, where the output is a p-component vector yT = (y ,...y ), is
1 p
straightforward. The model takes the form
n
f (x|β) = β +X β x , (3.8)
k 0k jk j
j=1
where the parameters β now have an additional index k = 1,...,p. Considering
jk
the parameters β as a (n+1) by p matrix, we can show that the solution takes the
same form as before [Eq. (3.7)] with Y as a m by p output matrix.
University of Zurich 18
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
3.1.1 Statistical analysis
Let us stop here and evaluate the quality of the method we have just introduced.
At the same time, we will take the opportunity to introduce some statistics notions,
which will be useful throughout the lecture.
Up to now, we have made no assumptions about the dataset we are given, we
simply stated that it consisted of input-output pairs, {(x ,y ),..., (x ,y )}. In
1 1 m m
order to assess the accuracy of our model in a mathematically clean way, we have
to make an additional assumption. The output data y ...,y may arise from some
1 m
measurement or observation. Then, each of these values will generically be subject
to errors (cid:15) ,··· ,(cid:15) by which the values deviate from the “true” output without
1 m
errors,
y = ytrue +(cid:15) , i = 1,··· ,m. (3.9)
i i i
We assume that this error (cid:15) is a Gaussian random variable with mean µ = 0 and
variance σ2, which we denote by (cid:15) ∼ N(0,σ2) 10. Assuming that a linear model
in Eq. (3.1) is a suitable model for our dataset, we are interested in the following
ˆ
question: How does our solution β as given in Eq. (3.7) compare with the true
solution βtrue which obeys
n
y = βtrue +X βtruex +(cid:15) , i = 1,...,m? (3.10)
i 0 j ij i
j=1
In order to make statistical statements about this question, we have to imagine
that we can fix the inputs x of our dataset and repeatedly draw samples for our
i
outputs y . Each time we will obtain a different value for y following Eq. (3.10), in
i i
other words the (cid:15) are uncorrelated random numbers. This allows us to formalise
i
the notion of an expectation value E(···) as the average over an infinite number of
draws. For each draw, we obtain a new dataset, which differs from the other ones
by the values of the outputs y . With each of these datasets, we obtain a different
i
ˆ ˆ
solution β as given by Eq. (3.7) . The expectation value E(β) is then simply the
average value we obtained across an infinite number of datasets. The deviation of
this average value from the “true” value given perfect data is called the bias of the
model,
ˆ ˆ
Bias(β) = E(β)−βtrue. (3.11)
For the linear regression we study here, the bias is exactly zero, because
ˆ (cid:16) (cid:17)
E(β) = E (Xf TXf )−1Xf T(Y true +(cid:15))
(3.12)
= βtrue,
where the second line follows because E((cid:15)) = 0 and (XfTXf )−1XfTY true = βtrue.
Equation (3.12) implies that linear regression is unbiased. Note that other machine
learning algorithms will in general be biased.
10Given a probability distribution P(x), we in general denote by x ∼ P(x) that x follows
the probability distribution P(x). Concretely, for discrete x this means that we choose x with
probability P(x), while for continuous x, the probability to lie in the interval dx is giben by
P(x)dx.
University of Zurich 19
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
What about the standard error or uncertainty of our solution? This information
is contained in the covariance matrix
ˆ (cid:16) ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ (cid:17)
Var(β) = E [β −E(β)][β −E(β)]T . (3.13)
The covariance matrix can be computed for the case of linear regression using the
solution in Eq. (3.7), the expectation value in Eq. (3.12) and the assumption in
Eq. (3.10) that Y = Ytrue +(cid:15) yielding
ˆ (cid:16) ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ (cid:17)
Var(β) = E [β −E(β)][β −E(β)]T
(cid:18)h ih iT (cid:19)
= E (Xf TXf )−1Xf T(cid:15) (Xf TXf )−1Xf T(cid:15) (3.14)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
= E (Xf TXf )−1Xf T(cid:15)(cid:15)TXf (Xf TXf )−1 .
This expression can be simplified by using the fact that our input matrices Xf are
independent of the draw such that
ˆ
Var(β) = (Xf TXf )−1Xf TE((cid:15)(cid:15)T)Xf (Xf TXf )−1
= (Xf TXf )−1Xf Tσ2IXf (Xf TXf )−1 (3.15)
= σ2(Xf TXf )−1.
Here, the second line follows from the fact that different samples are uncorrelated,
which implies that E((cid:15)(cid:15)T) = σ2I with I the identity matrix. The diagonal elements
of σ2(XfTXf )−1 then correspond to the variance
ˆ (cid:16) ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ (cid:17)
Var(β) = E [β −E(β)][β −E(β)]T
(3.16)
= σ2(Xf TXf )−1
q ˆ
of the individual parameters β . The standard error or uncertainty is then Var(β ).
i i
There is one more missing element: we have not explained how to obtain the
variances σ2 of the outputs y. In an actual machine learning task, we would not
know anything about the true relation, as given in Eq. (3.10), governing our dataset.
The only information we have access to is a single dataset. Therefore, we have to
estimate the variance using the samples in our dataset, which is given by
1 m
σˆ2 = X(y −f(x |β ˆ ))2, (3.17)
m−n−1 i i
i=1
ˆ
where y are the output values from our dataset and f(x |β) is the corresponding
i i
prediction. Note that we normalized the above expression by (m−n−1) instead
of m to ensure that E(σˆ2) = σ2, meaning that σˆ2 is an unbiased estimator of σ2.
Our ultimate goal is not simply to fit a model to the dataset. We want our
model to generalize to inputs not within the dataset. To assess how well this is
achieved, let us consider the prediction a˜Tβ ˆ on a new random input-output pair
(a,y ). The output is again subject to an error y = a˜Tβtrue + (cid:15). In order to
0 0
compute the expected error of the prediction, we compute the expectation value of
the loss function over these previously unseen data. This is also known as the test or
University of Zurich 20
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
generalization error. For the square-distance loss function, this is the mean square
error (MSE)
MSE(β ˆ ) =E (cid:16) (y −a˜Tβ ˆ )2 (cid:17)
0
=E (cid:16) ((cid:15)+a˜Tβtrue −a˜Tβ ˆ )2 (cid:17)
(3.18)
=E((cid:15)2)+[a˜T(βtrue −E(β ˆ ))]2 +E (cid:16) [a˜T(β ˆ −E(β ˆ ))]2 (cid:17)
=σ2 +[a˜TBias(β ˆ )]2 +a˜TVar(β ˆ )a˜.
There are three terms in the expression. The first term is the irreducible or intrinsic
uncertainty of the dataset. The second term represents the bias and the third term
is the variance of the model. For RSS linear regression, the estimate is unbiased so
that
MSE(β ˆ ) = σ2 +a˜TVar(β ˆ )a˜. (3.19)
Based on the assumption that the dataset indeed derives from a linear model as
given by Eq. (3.10) with a Gaussian error, it can be shown that the RSS solution,
Eq. (3.7), gives the minimum error among all unbiased linear estimators, Eq. (3.1).
This is known as the Gauss-Markov theorem.
This completes our error analysis of the method.
3.1.2 Regularization and the bias-variance tradeoff
AlthoughtheRSSsolutionhastheminimumerroramongunbiasedlinearestimators,
the expression for the generalization error, Eq. (3.18), suggests that we can actually
still reduce the error by sacrificing some bias in our estimate.
A possible way to reduce the generalization error is to simply drop some data
features. From the n data features {x ,...x }, we can pick a reduced set M. For
1 n
example, we can choose M = {x ,x ,x }, and define our new linear model as
1 3 7
f(x|β) = β + X β x . (3.20)
0 j j
xj∈M
This is equivalent to fixing some parameters to zero, i.e., β = 0 if x ∈/ M. Mini-
k k
mizing the RSS with this constraint results in a biased estimator but the reduction
in model variance can sometimes help to reduce the overall generalization error.
For a small number of features, n ∼ 20, one can search exhaustively for the best
subset of features that minimizes the error, but beyond that the search becomes
computationally unfeasible.
A common alternative is called ridge regression. In this method, we consider the
same linear model given in Eq. (3.1) but with a modified loss function
m n
L (β) = X[y −f(x |β)]2 +λ X β2, (3.21)
ridge i i j
i=1 j=0
where λ > 0 is a positive parameter. This is almost the same as the RSS apart
from the term proportional to λ [c.f. Eq. (3.4)]. The effect of this new term is to
penalize large parameters β and bias the model towards smaller absolute values.
j
The parameter λ is an example of a hyper-parameter, which is kept fixed during the
training. On fixing λ and minimizing the loss function, we obtain the solution
ˆ
β = (Xf TXf +λI)−1Xf TY , (3.22)
ridge
University of Zurich 21
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
Error
Variance
Bias
ModelComplexity
rorrEnoitazilareneG
Figure 8: Schematic depiction of the bias-variance tradeoff.
ˆ
from which we can see that as λ → ∞, β → 0. By computing the bias and
ridge
variance,
ˆ
Bias(β ) = −λ(Xf TXf +λI)−1βtrue
ridge (3.23)
ˆ
Var(β ) = σ2(Xf TXf +λI)−1Xf TXf (Xf TXf +λI)−1,
ridge
it is also obvious that increasing λ increases the bias, while reducing the variance.
This is the tradeoff between bias and variance. By appropriately choosing λ it is
possible that the generalization error can be reduced. We will introduce in the next
section a common strategy how to find the optimal value for λ.
The techniques presented here to reduce the generalization error, namely drop-
ping of features and biasing the model to small parameters, are part of a large class
of methods known as regularization. Comparing the two methods, we can see a sim-
ilarity. Both methods actually reduce the complexity of our model. In the former,
some parameters are set to zero, while in the latter, there is a constraint which effec-
tively reduces the magnitude of all parameters. A less complex model has a smaller
variance but larger bias. By balancing these competing effects, generalization can
be improved, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 8.
In the next chapter, we will see that these techniques are useful beyond ap-
plications to linear methods. We illustrate the different concepts in the following
example.
3.1.3 Example
Weillustratetheconceptsoflinearregressionusingamedicaldataset. Intheprocess,
we will also familiarize ourselves with the standard machine learning workflow [see
Fig. 9]. For this example, we are given 10 data features, namely age, sex, body
mass index, average blood pressure, and six blood serum measurements from 442
diabetes patients, and our task is to train a model f(x|β) [Eq. (3.1)] to predict a
quantitative measure of the disease progression after one year.
Recall that the final aim of a machine-learning task is not to obtain the smallest
possible value for the loss function such as the RSS, but to minimize the general-
ization error on unseen data [c.f. Eq. (3.18)]. The standard approach relies on a
division of the dataset into three subsets: training set, validation set and test set.
The standard workflow is summarized in Box 1.
University of Zurich 22
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
Dataset
Validation Set Training Set Test Set
Tune
Hyperparameters
Final
Validate Train Model Test Final
Model Model Model
Figure 9: Machine Learning Workflow.
Box 1: ML Workflow
1. Divide the dataset into training set T , validation set V and test set S. A
common ratio for the split is 70 : 15 : 15.
2. Pick the hyperparameters, e.g., λ in Eq. (3.21).
3. Train the model with only the training set, in other words minimize the
loss function on the training set. [This corresponds to Eq. (3.7) or (3.22)
for the linear regression, where Xf only contains the training set.]
4. Evaluate the MSE (or any other chosen metric) on the validation set, [c.f.
Eq. (3.18)]
1
MSE (β ˆ ) = X(y −f(x |β ˆ ))2. (3.24)
validation j j
|V|
j∈V
This is known as the validation error.
5. Pick a different value for the hyperparameters and repeat steps 3 and 4,
until validation error is minimized.
6. Evaluate the final model on the test set
1
MSE (β ˆ ) = X(y −f(x |β ˆ ))2. (3.25)
test j j
|S|
j∈S
It is important to note that the test set S was not involved in optimizing either
parameters β or the hyperparameters such as λ.
Applying this procedure to the diabetes dataset11, we obtain the results in
Fig. 10. We compare RSS linear regression with the ridge regression, and indeed
we see that by appropriately choosing the regularization hyperparameter λ, the
generalization error can be minimized.
As side remark regarding the ridge regression, we can see on the left of Fig. 11,
ˆ
that as λ increases, the magnitude of the parameters, Eq. (3.22), β decreases.
ridge
11Source: https://www4.stat.ncsu.edu/∼boos/var.select/diabetes.html
University of Zurich 23
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
Figure 10: Ridge Regression on Diabetes patients dataset. Left: Validation
error versus λ. Right: Test data versus the prediction from the trained model. If
the prediction were free of any error, all the points would fall on the black line.
Consider on the other hand, a different form of regularization, which goes by the
name lasso regression, where the loss function is given by
m n
L (β) = X[y −f(x |β)]2 +α X |β |. (3.26)
lasso i i j
i=1 j=0
Despite the similarities, lasso regression has a very different behavior as depicted on
the right side of Fig. 11. As α increases some parameters actually vanish and can
be ignored completely. This actually corresponds to dropping certain data features
completely and can be useful if we are interested in selecting the most important
features in a dataset.
Figure 11: Evolution of the model parameters. Increasing the hyperparameter
λ or α leads to a reduction of the absolute value of the model parameters, here
shown for the ridge (left) and Lasso (right) regression for the Diabetes dataset.
University of Zurich 24
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
3.2 Linear classifiers and their extensions
3.2.1 Binary classification and support vector machines
In a classification problem, the aim is to categorize the inputs into one of a finite
set of classes. Formulated as a supervised learning task, the dataset again consists
of input-output pairs, i.e. {(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )} with x ∈ Rn. However, unlike
1 1 m m
regression problems, the output y is a discrete integer number representing one of
the classes. In a binary classification problem, in other words a problem with only
two classes, it is natural to choose y ∈ {−1,1}.
We have introduced linear regression in the previous section as a method for
supervised learning when the output is a real number. Here, we will see how we
can use the same model for a binary classification task. If we look at the regression
problem, we first note that geometrically
n
f(x|β) = β +X β x = 0 (3.27)
0 j j
j=1
defines a hyperplane perpendicular to the vector with elements β . If we fix
j≥1
the length Pn β2 = 1, then f(x|β) measures the (signed) distance of x to the
j=1 j
hyperplane with a sign depending on which side of the plane the point x lies. To
i
use this model as a classifier, we thus define
F(x|β) = signf(x|β), (3.28)
which yields {−1,+1}. If the two classes are (completely) linearly separable, then
the goal of the classification is to find a hyperplane that separates the two classes
in feature space. Specifically, we look for parameters β, such that
y x˜Tβ > M, ∀i, (3.29)
i i
ˆ
where M is called the margin. The optimal solution β then maximizes this margin.
Note that instead of fixing the norm of β and maximizing M, it is customary to
j≥1
minimize Pn β2 setting M = 1 in Eq. (3.29).
j=1 j
In most cases, the two classes are not completely separable. In order to still find
a good classifier, we allow some of the points x to lie within the margin or even
i
on the wrong side of the hyperplane. For this purpose, we rewrite the optimization
constraint Eq. (3.29) to
y x˜Tβ > (1−ξ ),with ξ ≥ 0, ∀i. (3.30)
i i i i
We can now define the optimization problem as finding
1 n
min X β2 +C X ξ (3.31)
2 j i
β,{ξi}
j=1 i
subjecttotheconstraintEq.(3.30). Notethatthesecondtermwithhyperparameter
C acts like a regularizer, in particular a lasso regularizer. As we have seen in the
example of the previous section, such a regularizer tries to set as many ξ to zero as
i
possible.
University of Zurich 25
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
4.00 4.50 5.00 5.50 6.00
Legth[cm]
]mc[htdiW
Figure 12: Binary classification. Hyperplane separating the two classes and
margin M of the linear binary classifier. The support vectors are denoted by a
circle around them.
We can solve this constrained minimization problem by introducing Lagrange
multipliers α and µ and solving
i i
1 n
min X β2 +C X ξ − X α [y x˜Tβ −(1−ξ )]− X µ ξ , (3.32)
2 j i i i i i i i
β,{ξi}
j=1 i i i
which yields the conditions
β = X α y x , (3.33)
j i i ij
i
0 = X α y (3.34)
i i
i
α = C −µ , ∀i. (3.35)
i i
It is numerically simpler to solve the dual problem
1
min X α α y y xTx − X α (3.36)
2 i i0 i i0 i i0 i
{αi}
i,i0 i
subject to P α y = 0 and 0 ≤ α ≤ C 12. Using Eq. (3.33), we can reexpress β to
i i i i j
find
f(x|{α }) = X0α y xTx +β , (3.40)
i i i i 0
i
where the sum only runs over the points x , which lie within the margin, as all other
i
points have α ≡ 0 [see Eq. (3.37)]. These points are thus called the support vectors
i
12Note that the constraints for the minimization are not equalities, but actually inequalities. A
solution thus has to fulfil the additional Karush-Kuhn-Tucker constraints
α [y x˜Tβ−(1−ξ )] = 0, (3.37)
i i i i
µ ξ = 0, (3.38)
i i
y x˜Tβ−(1−ξ ) > 0. (3.39)
i i i
University of Zurich 26
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
and are denoted in Fig. 12 with a circle around them. Finally, note that we can use
Eq. (3.37) again to find β .
0
The Kernel trick and support vector machines
We have seen in our discussion of PCA that most data is not separable linearly.
However, we have also seen how the kernel trick can help us in such situations. In
particular, we have seen how a non-linear function Φ(x), which we first apply to
the data x, can help us separate data that is not linearly separable. Importantly,
we never actually use the non-linear function Φ(x), but only the kernel. Looking
at the dual optimization problem Eq. (3.36) and the resulting classifier Eq. (3.40),
we see that, as in the case of Kernel PCA, only the kernel K(x,y) = Φ(x)TΦ(y)
enters, simplifying the problem. This non-linear extension of the binary classifier is
called a support vector machine.
3.2.2 More than two classes: logistic regression
In the following, we are interested in the case of p classes with p > 2. After the
previous discussion, it seems natural for the output to take the integer values y =
1,...,p. However, it turns out to be helpful to use a different, so-called one-hot
encoding. In this encoding, the output y is instead represented by the p-dimensional
unit vector in y direction e(y),
 e(y) 0
y −→ e(y) =         e 1 ( y . . . . . . y)         =        1 . . . . . .        , (3.41)
   
e(y) 0
p
where e(y) = 1 if l = y and zero for all other l = 1,...,p. A main advantage of this
l
encoding is that we are not forced to choose a potentially biasing ordering of the
classes as we would when arranging them along the ray of integers.
A linear approach to this problem then again mirrors the case for linear re-
gression. We fit a multi-variate linear model, Eq. (3.8), to the one-hot encoded
dataset {(x ,e(y1)),...,(x ,e(ym))}. By minimising the RSS, Eq. (3.4), we obtain
1 m
the solution
ˆ
β = (Xf TXf )−1Xf TY, (3.42)
where Y is the m by p output matrix. The prediction given an input x is then a
p-dimensional vector f(x|β ˆ ) = x˜Tβ ˆ . On a generic input x, it is obvious that the
components of this prediction vector would be real valued, rather than being one of
ˆ
the one-hot basis vectors. To obtain a class prediction F(x|β) = 1,...,p, we simply
take the index of the largest component of that vector, i.e.,
ˆ ˆ
F(x|β) = argmaxf (x|β). (3.43)
k
k
Theargmaxfunctionisanon-linearfunctionandisafirstexampleofwhatisreferred
to as activation function.
For numerical minimization, it is better to use a smooth generalization of the
argmax function as activation function. Such an activation function is given by the
University of Zurich 27
Machine Learning for the Sciences 3 SUPERVISED LEARNING I
softmax function
ˆ
ef
k
(x|βˆ)
F (x|β) = . (3.44)
k Pp
k0=1
ef k0(x|βˆ)
Importantly, the output of the softmax function is now a probability P(y = k|x),
ˆ
since P F (x|β) = 1. This extended linear model is referred to as logistic regres-
k k
sion 13.
The current linear approach based on classification of one-hot encoded data
generally works poorly when there are more than two classes. We will see in the
next chapter that relatively straightforward non-linear extensions of this approach
can lead to much better results.
13Note that the softmax function for two classes is the logistic function.
University of Zurich 28
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
4 Supervised Learning with Neural Net-
works
Inthepreviouschapter, wecoveredthebasicsofmachinelearningusingconventional
methods such as linear regression and principle component analysis. In the present
chapter, we move towards a more complex class of machine learning models: neural
networks. Neural networks have been central to the recent vast success of machine
learning in many practical applications.
The idea for the design of a neural network model is an analogy to how biological
organisms process information. Biological brains contain neurons, electrically acti-
vated nerve cells, connected by synapses that facilitate information transfer between
neurons. The machine learning equivalent of this structure, the so-called artificial
neural network or neural network in short, is a mathematical function developed
with the same principles in mind. It is composed from elementary functions, the
neurons, which are organized in layers that are connected to each other. To sim-
plify the notation, a graphical representation of the neurons and network is used, see
Fig.13. Theconnectionsinthegraphicalrepresentationmeansthattheoutputfrom
one set of neurons (forming one layer) serves as the input for the next set of neurons
(the next layer). This defines a sense of direction in which information is handed
over from layer to layer, and thus the architecture is referred to as a feed-forward
neural network.
In general, an artificial neural network is simply an example of a variational
non-linear function that maps some (potentially high-dimensional) input data to a
desired output. Neural networks are remarkably powerful and it has been proven
that under some mild structure assumptions they can approximate any smooth
function arbitrarily well as the number of neurons tends to infinity. A drawback
is that neural networks typically depend on a large amount of parameters. In the
following, we will learn how to construct these neural networks and find optimal
values for the variational parameters.
Inthischapter, wearegoingtodiscussoneoptionforoptimizingneuralnetworks:
the so-called supervised learning. A machine learning process is called supervised
whenever we use training data comprising input-output pairs, in other words input
with known correct answer (the label), to teach the network-required task.
Input
Output
"carrot"
...
x
1
x
2
x
3
x
n
informationflow
Figure 13: Neural Network. Graphical representation and basic architecture.
University of Zurich 29
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
ReLu
sigmoid
tanh
Figure 14: The artificial neuron. Left: schematic of a single neuron and its
functionalform. Right: examplesofthecommonlyusedactivationfunctions: ReLU,
sigmoid function and hyperbolic tangent.
4.1 Computational neurons
The basic building block of a neural network is the neuron. Let us consider a single
neuron which we assume to be connected to k neurons in the preceding layer, see
Fig. 14 left side. The neuron corresponds to a function f : Rk → R which is a
composition of a linear function q : Rk → R and a non-linear (so-called activation
function) g : R → R. Specifically,
f(z ,...,z ) = g(q(z ,...,z )) (4.1)
1 k 1 k
where z ,z ,...,z are the outputs of the neurons from the preceding layer to which
1 2 k
the neuron is connected.
The linear function is parametrized as
k
q(z ,...,z ) = X w z +b. (4.2)
1 k j j
j=1
Here, the real numbers w ,w ,...,w are called weights and can be thought of as
1 2 k
the “strength” of each respective connection between neurons in the preceding layer
and this neuron. The real parameter b is known as the bias and is simply a constant
offset 14. The weights and biases are the variational parameters we will need to
optimize when we train the network.
The activation function g is crucial for the neural network to be able to approxi-
mate any smooth function, since so far we merely performed a linear transformation.
For this reason, g has to be nonlinear. In analogy to biological neurons, g represents
the property of the neuron that it “spikes”, in other words it produces a noticeable
output only when the input potential grows beyond a certain threshold value. The
most common choices for activation functions, shown in Fig. 14, include:
• ReLU: ReLU stands for rectified linear unit and is zero for all numbers smaller
than zero, while a linear function for all positive numbers.
14Note that this bias is unrelated to the bias we learned about in regression.
University of Zurich 30
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
• Sigmoid: The sigmoid function, usually taken as the logistic function, is a
smoothed version of the step function.
• Hyperbolic tangent: The hyperbolic tangent function has a similar behavior as
sigmoid but has both positive and negative values.
• Softmax: The softmax function is a common activation function for the last
layer in a classification problem (see below).
The choice of activation function is part of the neural network architecture and
is therefore not changed during training (in contrast to the variational parameters
weightsandbias, whichareadjustedduringtraining). Typically, thesameactivation
function is used for all neurons in a layer, while the activation function may vary
from layer to layer. Determining what a good activation function is for a given layer
of a neural network is typically a heuristic rather than systematic task.
Note that the softmax provides a special case of an activation function as it
explicitly depends on the output of the q functions in the other neurons of the same
layer. Let us label by l = 1,...,n the n neurons in a given layer and by q the
l
output of their respective linear transformation. Then, the softmax is defined as
eq
l
g (q ,...,q ) = (4.3)
l 1 n Pn
l0=1
eq l0
for the output of neuron l. A useful property of softmax is that
X g (q ,...,q ) = 1, (4.4)
l 1 n
l
so that the layer output can be interpreted as a probability distribution. As we saw
in the previous chapter, this is particularly useful for classification tasks.
4.2 A simple network structure
Now that we understand how a single neuron works, we can connect many of them
together and create an artificial neural network. The general structure of a simple
(feed-forward) neural network is shown in Fig. 15. The first and last layers are the
input and output layers (blue and violet, respectively, in Fig. 15) and are called
visible layers as they are directly accessed. All the other layers in between them
are neither accessible for input nor providing any direct output, and thus are called
hidden layers (green layer in Fig. 15).
Assuming we can feed the input to the network as a vector, we denote the input
data with x. The network then transforms this input into the output F(x), which
in general is also a vector. As a simple and concrete example, we write the complete
functional form of a neural network with one hidden layer as shown in Fig. 15,
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17)
F(x) = g[2] W[2]g[1] W[1]x+b[1] +b[2] . (4.5)
Here, W[n] and b[n] are the weight matrix and bias vectors of the n-th layer. Specif-
ically, W[1] is the k ×l weight matrix of the hidden layer with k and l the number
of neurons in the input and hidden layer, respectively. W[1] is the j-the entry of
ij
University of Zurich 31
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
inputlayer hiddenlayer(s) outputlayer
Figure 15: Simple neural network. Architecture and variational parameters.
the weight vector of the i-th neuron in the hidden layer, while b[1] is the bias of this
i
neuron. The W[2] and b[2] are the respective quantities for the output layer. This
ij i
network is called fully connected or dense, because each neuron in a given layer takes
as input the output from all the neurons in the previous layer, in other words all
weights are allowed to be non-zero.
Note that for the evaluation of such a network, we first calculate all the neurons’
valuesofthefirsthiddenlayer, whichfeedintotheneuronsofthesecondhiddenlayer
and so on until we reach the output layer. This procedure, which is possible only
for feed-forward neural networks, is obviously much more efficient than evaluating
the nested function of each output neuron independently.
4.3 Training
AdjustingalltheweightsandbiasestoachievethetaskgivenusingdatasamplesD =
{(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )} constitutes the training of the network. In other words, the
1 1 m m
training is the process that makes the network an approximation F (x) ≈ F(x) to
θ
the mathematical function F(x) = y that we want it to represent. Each neuron has
its own bias and weights, a potentially huge number of variational parameters that
we collectively denote by θ = {W,B}, and we will need to adjust all of them.
We have already seen in the previous chapter how one in principle trains a
variational function: We introduce a loss function L(θ), which characterizes how
well the network is doing at predicting the correct output for each input. The loss
function now depends, through the neural network, on all the weights and biases.
Once we have defined a loss function, we also already understand how to train the
network: weneedtominimizeL(θ)withrespecttoW andB. However,Listypically
a high-dimensional function and may have many nearly degenerate minima. Unlike
in the previous chapter, finding the loss function’s absolute minimum exactly is
typicallyintractableanalyticallyandmaycomeatprohibitivecostscomputationally.
The practical goal is therefore rather to find a “good” instead than the absolute
minimum through training. Having found such “good” values for W,B, the network
can then be applied on previously unseen data.
Inordertominimizethelossfunctionnumerically,weemployaniterativemethod
called gradient descent 15. Intuitively, the method corresponds to “walking down the
hill” in our many parameter landscape until we reach a (local) minimum. For this
15We will discuss more elaborate variations of this method in the exercises.
University of Zurich 32
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
purpose, we use the derivatives of the cost function to update all the weights and
biases incrementally and search for the minimum of the function via tiny steps on
the many-dimensional surface. More specifically, we can update all weights and
biases in each step as
∂L(θ)
θ → θ −η . (4.6)
α α
∂θ
α
The variable η, also referred to as learning rate, specifies the size of the step we
use to walk the landscape. If the learning rate is too small in the beginning, we
might get stuck in a local minimum early on, while for too large η we might never
find a minimum. The learning rate is a hyperparameter of the training algorithm.
Note that gradient descent is just a discrete many-variable version of the analytical
search for extrema which we know from calculus: An extremum is characterized by
vanishing derivatives in all directions, which results in convergence in the gradient
descent algorithm outlined above.
The choice of loss function may strongly impact the efficiency of the training
and is based on heuristics (as was the case with the choice of activation functions).
In the previous chapter, we already encountered one loss function, the mean square
error
1 m
L(θ) = X ||F (x )−y ||2. (4.7)
2m θ i i 2
i=1
q
Here, ||a|| = P a2 is the L2 norm and thus, this loss function is also referred
2 i i
to as L2 loss. An advantage of the L2 loss is that it is a smooth function of the
variational parameters. Another natural loss function is the mean absolute error,
which is given by
1 m
L(θ) = X ||F (x )−y || , (4.8)
2m θ i i 1
i=1
where ||a|| = P |a | denotes the L1 norm. This loss function is thus also called the
1 i i
L1 loss. Note that the L2 norm, given the squares, puts more weight on outliers
than the L1 loss.
The two loss functions introduced so far are the most common loss functions for
regression tasks, where the network provides a continuous output. For tasks, where
each neuron outputs a probability, for example in classification problems, a great
choice is the cross-entropy between true label, y and the network output, F (x )
i θ i
defined as
m
L (θ) = − X[y ·log(F (x ))+(1−y )·log(1−F (x ))], (4.9)
ent i θ i i θ i
i=1
where the logarithm is taken element-wise. This loss function is also called negative
log-likelihood. It is here written for outputs that lie between 0 and 1, as is the
case when the activation function of the last layer of the network is sigmoid σ(z) =
1/(1+e−z).
Before continuing with the intricacies of implementing such a gradient descent
algorithm for (deep) neural networks, we can try to better understand the loss
functions. While the L1 and L2 loss are obvious measures, the choice of cross
entropy is less intuitive. The different cost functions actually differ by the speed
of the learning process. The learning rate is largely determined by the partial
derivatives of the cost function ∂L/∂θ, see Eq. (4.6) and slow learning appears
University of Zurich 33
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
when these derivatives become small. Let us consider the toy example of a single
neuron with sigmoid activation F(x) = σ(wx+b). Then, the L2 cost function has
derivatives ∂ L and ∂ L that are proportional to σ0(w +b). We observe that these
w b
derivatives become very small for σ(w + b) → 1, because σ0 is very small in that
limit, leading to a slowdown of learning. This slowdown is also observed in more
complex neural networks with L2 loss; we considered the simple case here only for
analytical simplicity.
Given this observation, we want to see whether the cross entropy can improve
the situation. We again compute the derivative of the cost function with respect to
the weights for a single term in the sum and a network that is composed of a single
sigmoid and a general input-output pair {x,y}
∂L y 1−y !
ent = − − σ0(wx+b)x
∂w σ(wx+b) 1−σ(wx+b)
σ0(wx+b)x (4.10)
= [σ(wx+b)−y]
σ(wx+b)[1−σ(wx+b)]
= x[σ(wx+b)−y],
whereinthelaststepweusedthatσ0(z) = σ(z)[1−σ(z)]. Thisisamuchbetterresult
than what we got for the L2 loss. The learning rate is here directly proportional
to the error between data point and prediction [σ(wx+b)−y]. The mathematical
reason for this change is that σ0(z) cancels out due to the specific form of the cross
entropy. A similar expression holds true for the derivative with respect to b,
∂L
ent = [σ(wx+b)−y]. (4.11)
∂b
In fact, if we insisted that we want the very intuitive form of Eqs. (4.10) and (4.11)
for the gradients, we can derive the cost function for the sigmoid activation function
to be the cross-entropy. To see this, we start from
∂L ∂L
= F0 (4.12)
∂b ∂F
and F0 = F(1−F) for the sigmoid activation, which, comparing to the desired form
of Eq. (4.11), yields
∂L F −y
= . (4.13)
∂F F(1−F)
When integrated with respect to F, Eq. (4.13) gives exactly the cross-entropy (up
to a constant). Starting from Eqs. (4.10) and (4.11), we can thus think of choosing
the cost function using backward engineering. Following this logic, we can think of
other pairs of final-layer activations and cost functions that may work well together.
What happens if we change the activation function in the last layer from sigmoid
to softmax, which is usually used for the case of a classification task? For the loss
function, we consider just the first term in the cross entropy—for softmax, this form
is appropriate—
m
L(θ) = − X y ·log(F (x )), (4.14)
i θ i
i=1
where, again, the logarithm is taken element-wise. For concreteness, let us look at
one-hot encoded classification problem. Then, all y labels are vectors with exactly
i
University of Zurich 34
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
one entry “1”. Let that entry have index n in the vector, such that (y ) = δ .
i i j ni,j
The loss function then reads
m
L(θ) = − Xlog(F (x )). (4.15)
ni i
i=1
Due to the properties of the softmax, F (x ) is always ≤ 1, so that the loss function
ni i
is minimized if it approaches 1, the value of the label. For the gradients, we obtain
∂L m 1 ∂F (x )
=− X ni i
∂b F (x ) ∂b
j i=1 ni i j
m 1
=− X [F (x )δ −F (x )F (x )] (4.16)
F (x ) ni i ni,j ni i j i
i=1 ni i
m
=X[F (x )−δ ]
j i ni,j
i=1
and a similar result for the derivatives with respect to the weights. We observe that,
again, the gradient has a similar favorable structure to the previous case, in that it
is linearly dependent on the error that the network makes.
Backpropagation
While the process of optimizing the many variables of the loss function is mathemat-
ically straightforward to understand, it presents a significant numerical challenge:
For each variational parameter, for instance a weight in the k-th layer W[k], the par-
ij
tial derivative ∂L/∂W[k] has to be computed. And this has to be done each time the
ij
network is evaluated for a new dataset during training. Naively, one could assume
that the whole network has to be evaluated for each derivative. Luckily there is an
algorithm that allows for an efficient and parallel computation of all derivatives—
this algorithm is known as backpropagation. The algorithm derives directly from the
chain rule of differentiation for nested functions and is based on two observations:
(1) The loss function is a function of the neural network F (x), that is L ≡ L(F).
θ
(2) To determine the derivatives in layer k only the derivatives of the subsequent
layers, given as Jacobi matrix
Df[l](z[l−1]) = ∂f[l]/∂z[l−1], (4.17)
with l > k and z[l−1] the output of the previous layer, as well as
∂z[k] = ∂g[k]∂q i [k] =   ∂ ∂ g q[ [ k k ] ] z j [k−1] θ α = W i [ j k] (4.18)
i
∂θ α [k] ∂q i [k] ∂θ α  ∂ ∂ g q[ [ k k ] ] θ α = b[ i k]
i
are required.
The calculation of the Jacobi matrix thus has to be performed only once for every
update. In contrast to the evaluation of the network itself, which is propagating
forward, (output of layer k is input to layer k + 1), we find that a change in the
Output propagates backwards through the network, hence the name16.
16Backpropagationisactuallyaspecialcaseofasetoftechniquesknownasautomatic differenti-
ation (AD). AD makes use of the fact that any computer program can be composed of elementary
operations(addition,subtraction,multiplication,division)andelementaryfunctions(sin,exp,...).
By repeated application of the chain rule, derivatives of arbitrary order can be computed auto-
matically.
University of Zurich 35
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
The full algorithm looks then as follows:
Algorithm 2: Backpropagation
Input: Loss function L that in turn depends on the neural network,
which is parametrized by weights and biases, summarized as
θ = {W,B}.
Output: Partial derivatives ∂L/∂θ[k] with respect to all parameters
α
θ[k] of all layers k = 1...n.
Calculate the derivatives with respect to the parameters of the output
layer: ∂L/∂W[n] = (∇L)T∂g[n] z[n−1], ∂L/∂b[n] = (∇L)T∂g[n]
ij ∂q[n] j i ∂q[n]
i i
for k = n−1...1 do
Calculate the Jacobi matrices for layer k: Dg[k] = (∂g[k]/∂q[k]) and
Df[k] = (∂f[k]/∂z[k−1]);
Multiply all following Jacobi matrices to obtain the derivatives of
layer k: ∂L/∂θ[k] = (∇L)TDf[n]···Df[k+1]Dg[k](∂q[k]/∂θ[k]) ;
α α
end
Aremainingquestioniswhentoactuallyperformupdatestothenetworkparam-
eters. One possibility would be to perform the above procedure for each training
data individually. Another extreme is to use all the training data available and
perform the update with an averaged derivative. Not surprisingly, the answer lies
somewhere in the middle: Often, we do not present training data to the network one
item at the time, but the full training data is divided into co-called mini-batches,
a group of training data that is fed into the network together. Chances are the
weights and biases can be adjusted better if the network is presented with more
information in each training step. However, the price to pay for larger mini-batches
is a higher computational cost. Therefore, the mini-batch size (often simply called
batch size) can greatly impact the efficiency of training. The random partitioning
of the training data into batches is kept for a certain number of iterations, before a
new partitioning is chosen. The consecutive iterations carried out with a chosen set
of batches constitute a training epoch.
4.4 Simple example: MNIST
As we discussed in the introduction, the recognition of hand-written digits 0, 1, ...9
is the “Drosophila” of machine learning with neural networks. There is a dataset
with tens of thousands of examples of hand-written digits, the so-called MNIST
data set. Each data sample in the MNIST dataset, a 28×28 grayscale image, comes
with a label, which holds the information which digit is stored in the image. The
difficulty of learning to recognize the digits is that handwriting styles are incredibly
personal and different people will write the digit “4” slightly differently. It would
be very challenging to hardcode all the criteria to recognize “4” and not confuse it
with, say, a “9”.
We can use a simple neural network as introduced earlier in the chapter to tackle
this complex task. We will use a network as shown in Fig. 15 and given in Eq. (4.5)
to do just that. The input is the image of the handwritten digit, transformed into
University of Zurich 36
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
a k = 282 long vector, the hidden layer contains l neurons and the output layer
has p = 10 neurons, each corresponding to one digit in the one-hot encoding. The
output is then a probability distribution over these 10 neurons that will determine
which digit the network identifies.
As an exercise, we build a neural network according to these guidelines and train
it. How exactly one writes the code depends on the library of choice, but the generic
structure will be the following:
Example 1: MNIST
1. Import the data: The MNIST database is available for download at http:
//yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
2. Define the model:
• Input layer: 282 = 784 neurons (the greyscale value of each pixel of
the image, normalized to a value in [0,1), is one component of the
input vector).
• Fully connected hidden layer: Here one can experiment, starting
from as few as 10 neurons. The use of a sigmoid activation function
is recommended, but others can in principle be used.
• Output layer: Use 10 neurons, one for each digit. The proper acti-
vation function for this classification task is, as discussed, a softmax
function.
3. Choose the loss function: Since we are dealing with a classification task
withasoftmaxoutputactivationlayer,weusethecross-entropy,Eq.(4.14).
4. Train and evaluate the model: Follow the standard machine-learning
workflow to traina and evaluate the model. However, unlike in the re-
gression example of the previous chapter, where we evaluated the model
using the mean square error, here we are rather interested in the accuracy
of our prediction.
aMostMLpackageshavesometypeof’train’functionbuiltin, sononeedtoworryabout
implementingback-propagationbyhand. Allthatisneededhereistocallthe’train’function
With the training completed, we want to understand how well the final model
performs in recognizing handwritten digits. For that, we introduce the accuracy
defined by
correct predictions
accuracy = . (4.19)
total predictions
Running 20 trainings with 30 hidden neurons with a learning rate η = 0.5 (a
mini-batch size of 10 and train for 30 epochs), we obtain an average accuracy of
96.11 %. With a L2 loss, we obtain only slightly worse results of 95.95%. For
100 hidden neurons, we obtain 97.99%. That is a considerable improvement over a
quadratic cost, where we obtain 96.73%—the more complex the network, the more
important it is to choose a good loss function. Still, these numbers are not even close
to state of the art neural network performances. The reason is that we have used
the simplest possible all-to-all connected architecture with only one hidden layer.
University of Zurich 37
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
In the following, we will introduce more advanced neural-network architectures and
show how to increase the performance.
Before doing so, we briefly introduce other important measures used to char-
acterize the performance of specifically binary-classification models in statistics:
precision, specificity and recall. In the language of true/false positives/negatives,
the precision is defined as
true positives
precision = . (4.20)
true positives+false positives
Recall (also referred to as sensitivity) is defined as
true positives
recall = . (4.21)
true positives+false negatives
Whilerecallcanbeinterpretedastruepositiverateasitrepresentstheratiobetween
outcomes identified as positive and actual positives, the specificity is an analogous
measures for negatives
true negatives
specificity = . (4.22)
true negatives+false positives
Note, however, that these measures can be misleading, in particular when dealing
with very unbalanced data sets.
4.5 Regularization
In the previous sections, we have illustrated an artificial neural network that is
constructed analogous to neuronal networks in the brain. A priori, a model is only
given a rough structure, within which it has a huge number of parameters to adjust
by learning from the training set. While we already understand that this is an
extraordinarily powerful approach, this method of learning comes with its own set
of challenges. The most prominent of them is the generalization of the rules learned
from training data to unseen data.
We have already encountered in the previous chapter how the naive optimization
of a linear model reduces its generalization. However, we have also seen how the
generalization error can be improved by reducing the variance at the cost of a biased
model using regularization. Training neural networks comes with the same issue:
we are always showing the model we built a training set that is limited in one way
or another and we need to make sure that the neural network does not learn partic-
ularities of that given training set, but actually extracts a general knowledge. As we
will discuss in the following, the mitigation strategies of regularization encountered
for linear models can be similarly used for neural networks.
Stepzerotoavoidover-fittingistocreateasufficientlyrepresentativeanddiverse
training set. Once this is taken care of, we can take several steps for the regular-
ization of the network. The simplest, but at the same time most powerful option is
introducing dropout layers. This regularization is very similar to dropping features
that we discussed for linear regression. However, the dropout layer ignores a ran-
domly selected subset of neuron outputs in the network only during training. Which
neurons are dropped is chosen at random for each training step. This regulariza-
tion procedure is illustrated in Fig. 16. By randomly discarding a certain fraction
University of Zurich 38
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
of neurons we add noise to the hidden layers that ensures that the network does
not get fixed at small particular features of the training set and is better equipped
to recognize the more general features. Another way of looking at it is that this
procedure corresponds to training a large number of neural networks with different
neuronconnectionsinparallel. Thefractionofneuronsthatareignoredinadropout
layer is a hyperparameter that is fixed a priori. Maybe it is counter-intuitive but
the best performance is often achieved when this number is sizable, between 20%
and 50%. It shows the remarkable resilience of the network against fluctuations.
As for the linear models, regularization can also be achieved
by adding regularization terms R(θ) to the loss function L(θ),
L(θ) → L(θ) + λR(θ) with λ a hyperparameter. We have al-
ready encountered the two most common regularization terms:
These are the L2 regularization 17 that we encountered in ridge
regression with Figure 16:
λ
R = X W2 (4.23) Dropout layer
L2 2 j
j
and L1 regularization that we saw in Lasso regression, where
λ
R = X |W |. (4.24)
L1 2 j
j
Note that, as is usually done, we penalize only the weights of the neural network,
such that the sums above run over all weights W of the network. Finally, while we
j
can in principle set different λ for each layer, it is common to use one for the whole
network.
As for the linear models, L2 regularization shrinks all parameters symmetrically,
whereasL1regularizationusuallycausesasubsetofparameterstovanish,aproperty
often used for feature selection. For this reason, both methods are also referred to as
weight decay. Either way, both L1 and L2 regularizations restrict the expressiveness
of the neural network, thus encouraging it to learn generalizable features rather than
overfitting specific features of the data set.
Theweightsarecommonlyinitializedwithsmallvaluesandincreaseduringtrain-
ing. Thisnaturallylimitsthecapacityofthenetwork, becauseforverysmallweights
it effectively acts as a linear model (when one approximates the activation function
by a linear function). Only once the weights become bigger, the network explores
its nonlinearity.
Another regularization technique consists in artificially enlarging the data set.
Data is often costly, but we have extra knowledge about what further data might
look like and feed this information in the machine learning workflow. For instance,
going back to the MNIST example, we may shift or tilt the existing images or apply
small transformations to them. By doing that, researchers were able to improve
MNIST performance by almost 1 percent 18. In particular if we know symmetries
of the problem from which the data originates (such as time translation invariance,
invariance under spatial translations or rotations), effective generation of augmented
datasets is possible. For classification problems in particular, data may not be
17L2 regularization is also known as Tikhonov regularization
18See Simard et al., http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.2003.1227801
University of Zurich 39
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
Kernel
Figure 17: Convolutional layer in 2D. Here with filter size k = 3 and stride
s = 2. The filter is first applied to the 3×3 sub-image in the top left of the input,
which yields the first pixel in the feature map. The filter then moves s neurons to
the right, which yields the next pixel and so on. After moving all the way to the
right, the filter moves s pixels down and starts from the left again until reaching the
bottom right.
distributed between categories equally. To avoid a bias, it is the desirable to enhance
the data in the underrepresented categories. Finally, adding various forms of noise
to the data set can help avoid overfitting of the existing noise and increase the
resilience of the neural network to noise. Note that this noise can be added to both,
the input data and the labels.
4.6 Convolutional neural networks
The fully-connected simple single-layer architecture for a neural network is in prin-
ciple universally applicable. However, this architecture is often inefficient and hard
to train. In this section, we introduce more advanced neural-network layers and
examples of the types of problems for which they are suitable.
4.6.1 Convolutional layers
The achieved accuracy in the MNIST example above was not as high as one may
havehoped, beingmuchworsethantheperformanceofahuman. Amainreasonwas
that, using a dense network structure, we discarded all local information contained
in the pictures. In other words, connecting every input neuron with every neuron
in the next layer, the information whether two neurons are close to each other is
lost. This information is, however, not only crucial for pictures, but quite often for
input data with an underlying geometric structure or natural notion of ‘distance’
in its correlations. To use this local information, so-called convolutional layers were
introduced. The neural networks that contain such layers are called convolutional
neural networks (CNNs).
The key idea behind convolutional layers is to identify certain (local) patterns in
the data. In the example of the MNIST images, such patterns could be straight and
curved lines, or corners. A pattern is then encoded in a kernel or filter in the form of
weights, whichareagainpartofthetraining. Theconvolutionallayerthancompares
these patterns with a local patch of the input data. Mathematically, identifying the
features in the data corresponds to a convolution (f ∗x)(t) = P f(τ)x(t−τ) of the
τ
kernel f with the original data x.
University of Zurich 40
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
Figure 18: Pooling layer (a) an average pooling and (b) a max pooling layer (both
n = 3).
For two-dimensional data, such as shown in the example in Fig. 17, we write the
discrete convolution explicitly as
k k
q = X X f x +b , (4.25)
i,j n,m si−m,sj−n 0
m=1n=1
where f are the weights of the kernel, which has linear size k, and b is a bias.
n,m 0
Finally, s is called stride and refers to the number of pixels the filter moves per
application. The output, q, is called feature map. Note that the dimension of the
feature map is n × n with n = b(n − k)/s + 1c when the input image is of
q q q in
dimensions n × n : application of a convolutional layer thus reduces the image
in in
size, an effect not always intended. To avoid this reduction, the original data can
be padded, for example by adding zeros around the border of the data to ensure the
feature map has the same dimension as the input data.
For typical convolutional networks, one applies a number of filters for each layer
in parallel, where each filter is trained to recognize different features. For instance,
one filter could start to be sensitive to contours in an image, while another filter
recognizes the brightness of a region. Further, while filters in the first layers may be
sensitive to local patterns, the ones in the later layers recognize larger structures.
This distribution of functionalities between filters happens automatically, it is not
preconceived when building the neural network.
4.6.2 Pooling
Another very useful layer, in particular in combination with convolutional layers, is
the pooling layer. Each neuron in the pooling layer takes input from n (neighboring)
neuronsinthepreviouslayer—inthecaseofaconvolutionalnetworkforeachfeature
map individually—and only retains the most significant information. Thus, the
pooling layer helps to reduce the spatial dimension of the data. What is considered
significant depends on the particular circumstances: Picking the neuron with the
maximum input among the n, called max pooling, detects whether a given feature is
present in the window. Furthermore, max pooling is useful to avoid dead neurons, in
other words neurons that are stuck with a value near 0 irrespective of the input and
such a small gradient for its weights and biases that this is unlikely to change with
further training. This is a scenario that can often happen especially when using the
ReLU activation function. Average pooling, in other words taking the average value
of the n inputs is a straight forward compression. Note that unlike other layers, the
pooling layer has just a small set of n connections with no adjustable weights. The
functionality of the pooling layer is shown in Fig. 18 (a) and (b).
University of Zurich 41
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
DNAsequences randomsequences
AACCCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAACT CTGGCCCGATATCAGTCACTTATCACGCGGATGAGT
CTATGTATTTATCTATCATCTATCTATCTACCTGCC TACCAAATCTCCCTATGATTAGTCTTATTGTAAATA
CACCTGGCTTCCTGTTGAAGTTGACCTGCTGGAACA ATTTGCCAAGAAGCGTATAACGCCCATTTGGTCTTA
CTCAGATCCTTCATGCTTTCATTGCTGCCTCCACAT AATGAGTCACTGCACAGACCAAGCAGCCGATCACGT
CCCTCCAGGTACCCAAGGTCTCTCCACTGCCCTGCC TGGAATTGAGAAGTGCGCGAAGGAGACTCGAGGATC
Figure 19: Comparison of DNA and random sequences.
An extreme case of pooling is global pooling, where the full input is converted to
a single output. Using a max pooling, this would then immediately tell us, whether
a given feature is present in the data.
4.6.3 Example: DNA sequencing
With lowering costs and expanding applications, DNA sequencing has become a
widespreadtoolinbiologicalresearch. Especiallytheintroductionofhigh-throughput
sequencing methods and the related increase of data has required the introduction
of data science methods into biology. Sequenced data is extremely complex and thus
a great playground for machine learning applications. Here, we consider a simple
classification as an example. The primary structure of DNA consists of a linear se-
quenceofbasicbuildingblockscallednucleotides. Thekeycomponentofnucleotides
are nitrogen bases: Adenine (A), Guanine (G), Cytosine (C), and Thymine (T). The
order of the bases in the linear chains defines the DNA sequence. Which sequences
aremeaningfulisdeterminedbyasetofcomplexspecificrules. Inotherwords, there
are series of letters A, G, C, and T that correspond to DNA and while many other
sequences do not resemble DNA. Trying to distinguish between strings of nitrogen
bases that correspond to human DNA and those that don not is a simple example
of a classification task that is at the same time not so easy for an untrained human
eye.
In Fig. 19, we show a comparison of five strings of human DNA and five strings
of 36 randomly generated letters A, G, C, and T. Without deeper knowledge it is
hard to distinguish the two classes and even harder to find the set of empirical rules
that quantify their distinction. We can let a neural network have a go and see if it
performs any better than us studying these sequences by visual analysis.
We have all ingredients to build a binary classifier that will be able to distin-
guish between DNA and non-DNA sequences. First, we download a freely available
database of the human genome from https://genome.ucsc.edu19. Here, we down-
loaded a database of encoding genomes that contains 100000 sequences of human
DNA (each is 36 letters long). Additionally, we generate 100000 random sequences
of letters A, G, C, T. The learning task we are facing now is very similar to the
MNIST classification, though in the present case, we only have two classes. Note,
however, that we generated random sequences of bases and labeled them as ran-
dom, even though we might have accidentally created sequences that do correspond
to human DNA. This limits the quality of our data set and thus naturally also the
final performance of the network.
The model we choose here has a standard architecture and can serve as a guiding
19http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/hg19/encodeDCC/wgEncodeUwRepliSeq/
wgEncodeUwRepliSeqBg02esG1bAlnRep1.bam
University of Zurich 42
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
DNA random
G G ccoonnvv pool ddeennssee
C C
T T
A A
T T DNA
C T
A T
G G
G G
C T
T T random
A A
G A
G A
T A
Figure 20: Neural network classification of DNA sequences. The two lower
panels show loss function and accuracy on the training (evaluation) data in green
(orange) as a function of the training step respectively.
example for supervised learning with neural networks that will be useful in many
other scenarios. In particular, we implement the following architecture:
Example 2: DNA classification
1. Import the data from http://genome.uscs.edu
2. Define the model:
• Input layer: The input layer has dimension 36 × 4 (36 entries per
DNA sequence, 4 to encode each of 4 different bases A, G, C, T)
Example: [[1,0,0,0], [0,0,1,0], [0,0,1,0], [0,0,0,1]] = ACCT
• Convolutional layer: Kernel size k = 4, stride s = 1 and number of
filters N = 64.
• Pooling layer: max pooling over n = 2 neurons, which reduces the
output of the previous layer by a factor of 2.
• Dense layer: 256 neurons with a ReLU activation function.
• Output layer: 2 neurons (DNA and non-DNA output) with softmax
activation function.
3. Loss function: Cross-entropy between DNA and non-DNA.
A schematic of the network structure as well as the evolution of the loss and the
accuracy measured over the training and validation sets with the number of training
steps are shown in Fig. 20. Comparing the accuracies of the training and validation
sets is a standard way to avoid overfitting: On the examples from the training set
we can simply check the accuracy during training. When training and validation
University of Zurich 43
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
accuracy reach the same number, this indicates that we are not overfitting on the
training set since the validation set is never used to adjust the weights and biases. A
decreasing validation accuracy despite an increasing training accuracy, on the other
hand, is a clear sign of overfitting.
We see that this simple convolutional network is able to achieve around 80%
accuracy. By downloading a larger training set, ensuring that only truly random
sequences are labeled as such, and by optimizing the hyper-parameters of the net-
work, it is likely that an even higher accuracy can be achieved. We also encourage
you to test other architectures: one can try to add more layers (both convolutional
and dense), adjust the size of the convolution kernel or stride, add dropout layers,
and finally, test whether it is possible to reach higher accuracies without over-fitting
on the training set.
4.6.4 Example: advanced MNIST
We can now revisit the MNIST example and approach the classification with the
more advanced neural network structures of the previous section. In particular, we
use the following architecture
Example 3: Advanced MNIST
1. Input layer: 28×28 (= 784) neurons.
2. Convolutional layer 1: Kernel size k = 3×3, stride s = 1 and number of
filters N = 32 with a ReLU activation function.
3. Pooling layer: max pooling over n = 2×2 neurons.
4. Convolutional layer 2: Kernel size k = 3×3, stride s = 1 and number of
filters N = 64 with a ReLU activation function.
5. Pooling layer: max pooling over n = 2×2 neurons.
6. Dropout: dropout layer for regularization with a 50% dropout probability.
7. Dense layer: 100 neurons with a ReLU activation function.
8. Output layer: 10 neurons with softmax activation function.
For the loss function, we again use cross-entropy between the output and the labels.
Notice here the repeated structure of convolutional layers and pooling layers. This
is a very common structure for deep convolutional networks. With this model, we
achieve an accuracy on the MNIST test set of 99.1%, a massive improvement over
the simple dense network.
4.7 Recurrent neural networks
We have seen in the previous section how the convolutional neural network allows
to retain local information through the use of filters. While this context-sensitivity
University of Zurich 44
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
of the CNN is applicable in many situations, where geometric information is im-
portant, there are situations we have more than neighborhood relations, namely
sequential order. An element is before or after an other, not simply next to it.
A common situation, where the order of the input is important, is with time-series
data. Examples are measurements of a distant star collected over years or the events
recorded in a detector after a collision in a particle collider. The classification task
in these examples could be the determination whether the star has an exoplanet, or
whether a Higgs boson was observed, respectively. Another example without any
temporal structure in the data is the prediction of a protein’s functions from its
primary amino-acid sequence.
A property that the above examples have in common is that the length of the
input data is not necessarily always fixed for all samples. This emphasizes again
another weakness of both the dense network and the CNN: The networks only work
withfixed-sizeinputandthereisnogoodproceduretodecreaseorincreasetheinput
size. While we can in principle always cut our input to a desired size, of course, this
finite window is not guaranteed to contain the relevant information.
Inthisfinalsectiononsupervisedlearning, weintroduceonemoreneuralnetwork
architecture that solves both problems discussed above: recurrent neural networks
(RNNs). The key idea behind a recurrent neural network is that input is passed to
the network one element after another—unlike for other neural networks, where an
input’vector’isgiventhenetworkallatonce—andtorecognizecontext, thenetwork
keeps an internal state, or memory, that is fed back to the network together with
the next input. Recurrent neural networks were developed in the context of natural
language processing (NLP), the field of processing, translating and transforming
spoken or written language input, where clearly, both context and order are crucial
pieces of information. However, over the last couple of years, RNNs have found
applications in many fields in the sciences.
The special structure of a RNN is depicted in Fig. 21. At step t, the input x and
t
the (hidden) internal state of the last step h are fed to the network to calculate
t−1
h . The new hidden memory of the RNN is finally connected to the output layer y .
t t
As shown in Fig. 21, this is equivalent to having many copies of the input-output
architecture, where the hidden layers of the copies are connected to each other. The
RNN cell itself can have a very simple structure with a single activation function.
RNN RNN RNN RNN
Figure 21: Recurrent neural network architecture. The input x is fed into
t
the recurrent cell together with the (hidden) memory h of the previous step to
t−1
produce the new memory h and the output y . One can understand the recurrent
t t
structure via the “unwrapped” depiction of the structure on the right hand side of
the figure. The red arrows indicate how gradients are propagated back in time for
updating the network parameters.
University of Zurich 45
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
Concretely, in each step of a simple RNN we update the hidden state as
h = tanh(W h +W x +b ), (4.26)
t hh t−1 xh t h
where we used for the nonlinearity the hyperbolic tangent, a common choice, which
is applied element-wise. Further, if the input data x has dimension n and the
t
hidden state h dimension m, the weight matrices W and W have dimensions
t hh xh
m×m and m×n, respectively. Finally, the output at step t can be calculated using
the hidden state h ,
t
y = W h . (4.27)
t ho t
A schematic of this implementation is depicted in Fig. 22(a). Note that in this
simplest implementation, the output is only a linear operation on the hidden state.
A straight forward extension—necessary in the case of a classification problem—is
to add a non-linear element to the output as well. Concretely,
y = g(W h +b ) (4.28)
t ho t y
with g(q) some activation function, such as a softmax. Note that while in principle
an output can be calculated at every step, this is only done after the last input
element in a classification task.
An interesting property of RNNs is that the weight matrices and biases, the
parameters we learn during training, are the same for each input element. This
property is called parameter sharing and is in stark contrast to dense networks.
In the latter architecture, each input element is connected through its own weight
matrix. While it might seem that this property could be detrimental in terms of
representabilityofthenetwork, itcangreatlyhelpextractingsequentialinformation:
Similar to a filter in a CNN, the network does not need to learn the exact location
of some specific sequence that carries the important information, it only learns to
recognizethissequencesomewhereinthedata. Notethatthewayeachinputelement
is processed differently is instead implemented through the hidden memory.
Parameter sharing is, however, also the root of a major problem when training
a simple RNN. To see this, remember that during training, we update the network
parametersusinggradientdescent. Asintheprevioussections, wecanusebackprop-
agation to achieve this optimization. Even though the unwrapped representation of
theRNNinFig.21suggestsasinglehiddenlayer, thegradientsforthebackpropaga-
tion have to also propagate back through time. This is depicted in Fig. 21 with the
red arrows 20. Looking at the backpropagation algorithm in Sec. 4.3 , we see that to
use data points from N steps back, we need to multiply N−1 Jacobi matrices Df[t0]
with t−N < t0 ≤ t. Using Eq. (4.27), we can write each Jacobi matrix as a product
of the derivative of the activation function, ∂ tanh(q), with the weight matrix. If ei-
q
ther of these factors 21 is much smaller than 1, the gradients decrease exponentially.
This is known as the problem of vanishing gradients. Alternatively, if the factors
are much larger than 1, the gradients grow exponentially, known as the problem
of exploding gradients. Both problems make learning long-term dependencies with
simple RNNs practically impossible.
20In the context of RNNs, backpropagation is thus referred to as backpropagation through time
(BPTT).
21For the weight matrix this means the singular values.
University of Zurich 46
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
(a) (b)
Figure 22: Comparison of (a) a simple RNN and (b) a LSTM. The boxes
denote neural networks with the respective activation function, while the circles de-
note element-wise operations. The dark green box indicates that the four individual
neural networks can be implemented as one larger one.
Note that the problem of exploding gradients can be mitigated by clipping the
gradients, in other words scaling them to a fixed size. Furthermore, we can use the
ReLU activation function instead of a hyperbolic tangent, as the derivative of the
ReLU for q > 0 is always 1. However, the problem of the shared weight matrices
can not so easily be resolved. In order to learn long-time dependencies, we have to
introduce a different architecture. In the following, we will discuss the long short-
term memory (LSTM) network. This architecture and its variants are used in most
applications of RNNs nowadays.
4.7.1 Long short-term memory
The key idea behind the LSTM is to introduce another state to the RNN, the so-
called cell state, which is passed from cell to cell, similar to the hidden state. How-
ever, unlike the hidden state, no matrix multiplication takes place, but information
is added or removed to the cell state through gates. The LSTM then commonly
comprises four gates which correspond to three steps: the forget step, the input and
update step, and finally the output step. We will in the following go through all of
these steps individually.
Forget step
In this step, specific information of the cell state is forgotten. Specifically, we update
the cell state as
c0 = σ(W h +W x +b )(cid:12)c . (4.29)
t hf t−1 xf t f t−1
where σ is the sigmoid function (applied element-wise) and (cid:12) denotes element-wise
multiplication. Note that this step multiplies each element of the gate state with a
number ∈ (0,1), in other words elements multiplied with a number close to 0 forget
their previous memory.
Input and update step
In the next step, we decide what and how much to add to the cell state. For this
purpose, we first decide what to add to the state. We first define what we would
like to add to the cell,
g = tanh(W h +W x +b ), (4.30)
t hu t−1 xu t u
University of Zurich 47
Machine Learning for the Sciences 4 SUPERVISED LEARNING II
which due to the hyperbolic tangent, −1 < gα < 1 for each element. However, we
t
do not necessarily update each element of the cell state, but rather we introduce
another gate, which determines whether to actually write to the cell,
i = σ(W h +W x +b ), (4.31)
t hi t−1 xi t i
again with 0 < iα < 1. Finally, we update the cell state
t
c = c0 +i (cid:12)g . (4.32)
t t t t
Output step
In the final step, we decide how much of the information stored in the cell state
should be written to the new hidden state,
h = σ(W h +W x +b )(cid:12)tanh(c ). (4.33)
t ho t−1 xo t o t
The full structure of the LSTM with the four gates and the element-wise opera-
tions is schematically shown in Fig. 22(b). Note that we can concatenate the input
x and hidden memory h into a vector of size n+m and write one large weight
t t−1
matrix W of size 4m×(m+n).
So far, we have only used the RNN in a supervised setting for classification
purposes, where the input is a sequence and the output a single class at the end of
the full sequence. A network that performs such a task is thus called a many-to-one
RNN. We will see in the next section, that unlike the other network architectures
encountered in this section, RNNs can straight-forwardly be used for unsupervised
learning, usually as one-to-many RNNs.
University of Zurich 48
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
5 Unsupervised Learning
In Sec. 4, we discussed supervised learning tasks, for which datasets consist of input-
output pairs, or data-label pairs. More often than not, however, we have data
without labels and would like to extract information from such a dataset. Clustering
problems fall in this category, for instance: We suspect that the data can be divided
into different types, but we do not know which features distinguish these types.
Mathematically, we can think of the data x as samples that were drawn from
a probability distribution P (x). The unsupervised learning task is to represent
data
this distribution with a model P (x), for example represented by a neural network
θ
and parametrized by θ. The model can then be used to study properties of the
distribution or to generate new ‘artificial’ data. The models we encounter in this
chapter are thus also referred to as generative models. In general, unsupervised
learning is conceptually more challenging than supervised learning. At the same
time, unsupervised algorithms are highly desirable, since unlabelled data is much
more abundant than labelled data. Moreover, we can in principle use a generative
model for a classification task by learning the joint probability distribution of the
data-label pair.
In this chapter, we will introduce three types of neural networks that are spe-
cific to unsupervised learning tasks: Restricted Boltzmann machines, autoencoders,
and generative adversarial networks. Furthermore, we will discuss how the RNN
introduced in the previous chapter can also be used for an unsupervised task.
5.1 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Before we discuss the specific neural network architectures, we need to formalize the
goal of the training. As we have discussed in the previous section, we need to define
alossfunction, whoseminimizationencodesthisgoal. Inthecaseofgenerativemod-
els, we will focus in the following on the maximum likelihood principle: The role of
the model is to provide an estimate P (x) of a probability distribution parametrized
θ
by parameters θ. The likelihood of a given data point x is then the probability that
the model assigns to this data point, L(θ;x) = P (x). The likelihood of the whole
θ
training data set is given by
m
L(θ;{x }) = Y P (x ), (5.1)
i θ i
i=1
where m is the number of samples in the data {x }. The goal is to find the param-
i
eters θ that maximize the likelihood. Thanks to the monotonicity of the logarithm
function, we can work with the log-likelihood,
m
θ ˆ =argmaxY P (x )
θ i
θ i=1 (5.2)
m
=argmaxXlogP (x ),
θ i
θ i=1
which is easier to handle. The maximization of the log-likelihood is equivalent to
the minimization of negative log-likelihood, which in turn can be interpreted as the
University of Zurich 49
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
Figure 23: Restricted Boltzmann machine. Each of the three visible units
and five hidden units represents a variable that can take the values ±1 and the
connections between them represent the entries W of the weight matrix that enters
ij
the energy function (5.3).
cross-entropy between two probability distributions: the ‘true’ distribution P (x),
data
from which the data has been drawn, and P (x). While we do not have access to
θ
P (x) in principle, we estimate it empirically as a distribution peaked at the m
data
data points we have in our data set.
5.2 Restricted Boltzmann machine
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) are a class of generative stochastic neural
networks. More specifically, given some (binary) input data x ∈ {0,1}nv , an RBM
can be trained to approximate the probability distribution of this input. Moreover,
once the neural network is trained to approximate the distribution of the input, we
can sample from the network, in other words we generate new instances from the
learned probability distribution.
The RBM consists of two layers (see Fig. 23) of binary units. Each binary unit
is a variable which can take the values 0 or 1. We call the first (input) layer visible
and the second layer hidden. The visible layer with input variables {v ,v ,...v },
1 2 nv
which we collect in the vector v, is connected to the hidden layer with variables
{h ,h ,...h }, which we collect in the vector h. The role of the hidden layer is to
1 2 nh
mediate correlations between the units of the visible layer. In contrast to the neural
networks we have seen in the previous chapter, the hidden layer is not followed by
an output layer. Instead, the RBM represents a probability distribution Prbm(v),
θ
which depends on variational parameters θ represented by the weights and biases of
a neural network. The RBM, as illustrated by the graph in Fig. 23, is a special case
of a network structure known as a Boltzmann machine with the restriction that a
unit in the visible layer is only connected to hidden units and vice versa, hence the
name restricted Boltzmann machine.
The structure of the RBM is motivated from statistical physics: To each choice
of the binary vectors v and h, we assign a value we call the energy
E(v,h) = − X a v − X b h − X v W h , (5.3)
i i j j i ij j
i j ij
where the vectors a, b, and the matrix W constitute the variational parameters θ
of the model. Given the energy, the probability distribution over the configurations
(v,h) is defined as
1
Prbm(v,h) = e−E(v,h), (5.4)
θ Z
University of Zurich 50
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
where
Z = X e−E(v,h) (5.5)
v,h
is a normalization factor called the partition function. The sum in Eq. (5.5) runs
over all binary vectors v and h, in other words vectors with entries 0 or 1. The
probability that the model assigns to a visible vector v is then the marginal over
the joint probability distribution Eq. (5.4),
1
Prbm(v) = X Prbm(v,h) = X e−E(v,h), (5.6)
θ θ Z
h h
where the sum runs over all hidden-layer configurations h ∈ {0,1}n h .
As a result of the restriction, the visible units, with the hidden units fixed, are
mutually independent: given a choice of the hidden units h, we have an indepen-
dent probability distribution for each visible unit given by
Prbm(v = 1|h) = σ(a +X W h ), i = 1,...,n , (5.7)
θ i i ij j v
j
where σ(x) = 1/(1+e−x) is the sigmoid function. Similarly, with the visible units
fixed, theindividualhiddenunitsarealsomutuallyindependentwiththeprobability
distribution
Prbm(h = 1|v) = σ(b +X v W ) j = 1,...,n . (5.8)
θ j j i ij h
i
The visible (hidden) units can thus be interpreted as artificial neurons connected to
the hidden (visible) units with sigmoid activation function and bias a (b). A direct
consequence of this mutual independence is that sampling a vector v or h reduces to
sampling every component individually. Notice that this simplification comes about
due to the restriction that visible (hidden) units do not directly interact amongst
themselves, meaning there are no terms proportional to v v or h h in Eq. (5.3). In
i j i j
thefollowing,weexplainhowonecantrainanRBManddiscusspossibleapplications
of RBMs.
5.2.1 Training an RBM
Consider a set of binary input data x , k = 1,...,m, drawn from a probability dis-
k
tribution P (x). The aim of the training is to tune the parameters θ = {a,b,W}
data
in an RBM such that after training Prbm(x) ≈ P (x). To solve this problem, we
θ data
use the maximum likelihood principle introduced in Sec. 5.1. As we discussed there,
maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to training the RBM using the negative
log-likelihood as a loss function,
m
L(θ) = − XlogPrbm(x ). (5.9)
θ k
k=1
For the gradient descent, we need derivatives of the loss function of the form
∂L(θ) m ∂logPrbm(x )
= − X θ k . (5.10)
∂W ∂W
ij k=1 ij
University of Zurich 51
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
This derivative consists of two terms,
∂logPrbm(x )
θ k = x Prbm(h = 1|x )− X v Prbm(h = 1|v)Prbm(v) (5.11)
∂W k,i θ j k i θ j θ
ij v
with the second one containing a sum over all possible visible-layer configurations
v ∈ {0,1}nv . Note that similarly simple forms are found for the derivatives with
respecttothecomponentsofaandb. Wecantheniterativelyupdatetheparameters
just as we have done in Sec. 4,
∂L(θ)
W → W −η (5.12)
ij ij
∂W
ij
with a sufficiently small learning rate η. As we have seen in the previous chapter in
the context of backpropagation, we can reduce the computational cost by replacing
the summation over the whole data set in Eq. (5.10) with a summation over a small
randomly chosen batch of samples. This reduction in the computational cost comes
at the expense of noise, but at the same time it can help to improve generalization.
However, there is one more problem: The second summation in Eq. (5.11), which
contains 2nv terms, cannot be efficiently evaluated exactly. Instead, we have to
approximate the sum by sampling the visible layer v from the marginal probability
distribution Prbm(v). This sampling can be done using Gibbs sampling as follows:
θ
Algorithm 3: Gibbs sampling
Input: Any visible vector v(0)
Output: Visible vector v(r)
for n = 1...r do
sample h(n) from Prbm(h|v = v(n−1));
θ
sample v(n) from Prbm(v|h = h(n));
θ
end
With sufficiently many steps r, the vector v(r) is an unbiased sample drawn from
Prbm(v). By repeating the procedure, we can obtain multiple samples to estimate
θ
the summation. Note that this is still rather computationally expensive, requiring
multiple evaluations on the model.
The key innovation which allows the training of an RBM to be computation-
ally feasible was proposed by Geoffrey Hinton (2002). Instead of obtaining multiple
samples, we simply perform the Gibbs sampling with r steps and estimate the sum-
mation with a single sample, in other words we replace the second summation in
Eq. (5.11) with
X v Prbm(h = 1|v)Prbm(v) → v0Prbm(h = 1|v0), (5.13)
i θ j θ i θ j
v
where v0 = v(r) is simply the sample obtained from r-step Gibbs sampling. With
this modification, the gradient, Eq. (5.11), can be approximated as
∂logPrbm(x)
θ ≈ x Prbm(h = 1|x)−v0Prbm(h = 1|v0). (5.14)
∂W i θ j i θ j
ij
University of Zurich 52
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
This method is known as contrastive divergence. Although the quantity com-
puted is only a biased estimator of the gradient, this approach is found to work well
in practice. The complete algorithm for training a RBM with r-step contrastive
divergence can be summarized as follows:
Algorithm 4: Contrastive divergence
Input: Dataset D = {x ,x ,...x } drawn from a distribution
1 2 m
P (x)
data
initialize the RBM weights θ = {a,b,W};
Initialize ∆W = ∆a = ∆b = 0;
ij i j
while not converged do
select a random batch S of samples from the dataset D ;
forall x ∈ S do
Obtain v0 by r-step Gibbs sampling starting from x
∆W ← ∆W −x Prbm(h = 1|x)+v0Prbm(h = 1|v0)
ij ij i θ j i θ j
end
W ← W −η∆W
ij ij ij
(and similarly for a and b)
end
Having trained the RBM to represent the underlying data distribution P (x),
data
there are a few ways one can use the trained model:
1. Pretraining We can use W and b as the initial weights and biases for a deep
network (c.f. Chapter 4), which is then fine-tuned with gradient descent and
backpropagation.
2. Generative Modelling As a generative model, a trained RBM can be used
to generate new samples via Gibbs sampling (Alg. 3). Some potential uses
of the generative aspect of the RBM include recommender systems and image
reconstruction. In the following subsection, we provide an example, where an
RBM is used to reconstruct a noisy signal.
5.2.2 Example: signal or image reconstruction/denoising
A major drawback of the simple RBMs for their application is the fact that they
only take binary data as input. As an example, we thus look at simple periodic
waveforms with 60 sample points. In particular, we use sawtooth, sine, and square
waveforms. In order to have quasi-continuous data, we use eight bits for each point,
such that our signal can take values from 0 to 255. Finally, we generate samples to
train with a small variation in the maximum value, the periodicity, as well as the
center point of each waveform.
After training the RBM using the contrastive divergence algorithm, we now have
a model which represents the data distribution of the binarized waveforms. Consider
now a signal which has been corrupted, meaning some parts of the waveform have
not been received and have thus been set to 0. By feeding this corrupted data into
the RBM and performing a few iterations of Gibbs sampling (Alg. 3), we can obtain
University of Zurich 53
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
original
Gibbs
sampling
RBMinput RBMoutput
corrupt
Figure 24: Signal reconstruction. Using an RBM to repair a corrupted signal,
here a sine and a sawtooth waveform.
a reconstruction of the signal, where the missing part has been repaired, as can been
seen at the bottom of Fig. 24.
Note that the same procedure can be used to reconstruct or denoise images. Due
to the limitation to binary data, however, the picture has to either be binarized, or
the input size to the RBM becomes fairly large for high-resolution pictures. It is
thus not surprising that while RBMs have been popular in the mid-2000s, they have
largelybeensupersededbymoremodernarchitecturessuchasgenerative adversarial
networks which we shall explore later in the chapter. However, they still serve a
pedagogical purpose and could also provide inspiration for future innovations, in
particular in science. A recent example is the idea of using an RBM to represent a
quantum mechanical state 22.
5.3 Training an RNN without supervision
In Sec. 4, the RNN was introduced as a classification model. Instead of classifying
sequences of data, such as time series, the RNN can also be trained to generate valid
sequences itself. Given the RNN introduced in Sec. 4.7 with variational parameters
θ, the implementation of such a generator is straight-forward and does not require
a new architecture. The main difference is that the output y of the network given
t
the data point x is a guess of the subsequent data point x instead of the class to
t t+1
which the whole sequence belongs to. This means in particular that the input and
output size are now the same. For training this network, we can once again use the
cross-entropy as a loss function, which for an individual data point reads
N
L (θ) = − X x ·log(y ), (5.15)
ent t+1 t
t=1
where x is now the ‘label’ for the input x and y is the output of the network and
t+1 t t
t runs over the input sequence with length N, where one usually uses an ‘end’ label
22Carleo and Troyer, Science 355, 602 (2017)
University of Zurich 54
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR NNR
Training Generation
'label'
output
(...) (...)
input
= = = = = ? ? ? ? ?
Figure 25: RNN used as a generator. For training, left, the input data shifted
by one, x , are used as the label. For the generation of new sequences, right, we
t+1
input a single data point x and the RNN uses the recurrent steps to generate a
1
new sequence.
for x to signal the end of the sequence. This training is schematically shown in
N+1
Fig. 25.
For generating a new sequence, it is enough to have one single input point x to
1
start the sequence. Note that since we now can start with a single data point x
1
and generate a whole sequence of data points {y }, this mode of using an RNN is
t
referred to as one-to-many. This sequence generation is shown on the right side of
Fig. 25.
5.3.1 Example: generating molecules with an RNN
To illustrate the concept of sequence generation using recurrent neural networks, we
use an RNN to generate new molecules. The first question we need to address is how
to encode a chemical structure into input data—of sequential form no less—that a
machine learning model can read. A common representation of molecular graphs
used in chemistry is the simplified molecular-input line-entry system, or SMILES.
Figure 26 shows examples of such SMILES strings for the caffeine, ethanol, and
aspirin molecules. We can use the dataset Molecular Sets 23, which contains ∼ 1.9M
molecules written in the SMILES format.
Using the SMILES dataset, we create a dictionary to translate each character
that appears in the dataset into an integer. We further use one-hot-encoding to
feed each character separately to the RNN. This creates a map from characters
in SMILES strings onto an array of numbers. Finally, in order to account for the
variable size of the molecules and hence, the variable length of the strings, we can in-
troducea‘stop’charactersuchthatthenetworklearnsandlatergeneratessequences
of arbitrary length.
WearenowreadytousetheSMILESstringsfortrainingournetworkasdescribed
above, where the input is a one-hot-encoded vector and the output is again a vector
of the same size. Note, however, that similar to a classification task, the output
vector is a probability distribution over the characters the network believes could
comenext. Unlikeaclassificationtask, whereweconsiderthelargestoutputthebest
23https://github.com/molecularsets/moses
University of Zurich 55
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
caffeine ethanol aspirin
O
CH3
H3C N N OH
HO CH3
O N N H3C O O
CH3
O
CN1C=NC2=C1C(=O)N(C(=O)N2C)C CCO CC(=O)OC1=CC=CC=C1C(=O)O
Figure 26: SMILES. Examples of molecules and their representation in SMILES.
guess of the network, here we sample in each step from the probability distribution
y to again have a one-hot-encoded vector for the input of the next step.
t
5.4 Autoencoders
Autoencoders are neuron-based generative models, initially introduced for dimen-
sionality reduction. The original purpose, thus, is similar to that of PCA or t-SNE
that we already encountered in Sec. 2, namely the reduction of the number of fea-
tures that describe our input data. Unlike for PCA, where we have a clear recipe
how to reduce the number of features, an autoencoder learns the best way of achiev-
ing the dimensionality reduction. An obvious question, however, is how to measure
the quality of the compression, which is essential for the definition of a loss function
and thus, training. In the case of t-SNE, we introduced two probability distributions
based on the distance of samples in the original and feature space, respectively, and
minimized their difference using the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
The solution the autoencoder uses is to have a neural network do first, the
dimensionality reduction, or encoding to the latent space, x 7→ e (x) = z, and
θ
then, the decoding back to the original dimension, z 7→ d (z), see Fig. 27. For
θ
the purpose of our discussion here, we assume that both the encoder and decoder
are deterministic. This architecture allows us to directly compare the original input
x with the reconstructed output d (e (x)), such that the autoencoder trains itself
θ θ
unsupervised by minimizing the difference. A good example of a loss function that
achieves successful training and that we have encountered already is the L2 loss,
1 m
L (θ) = X kx −d (e (x ))k2. (5.16)
ae 2m i θ θ i 2
i=1
In other words, we compare point-wise the difference between the input to the
encoder with the decoder’s output.
Intuitively, thelatentspacewithitslowerdimensionpresentsabottleneckforthe
information propagation from input to output. The goal of training is to find and
keep the most relevant information for the reconstruction to be optimal. The latent
space then corresponds to the reduced space in PCA and t-SNE. Note that much
like in t-SNE but unlike in PCA, the new features are in general not independent.
University of Zurich 56
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
input latent output
space
Encoder Decoder
Figure 27: General autoencoder architecture. A neural network is used to
contract a compressed representation of the input in the latent space. A second
neural network is used to reconstruct the original input.
5.4.1 Variational autoencoders
Amajorproblemoftheapproachintroducedintheprevioussectionisitstendencyto
overfitting. As an extreme example, a sufficiently complicated encoder-decoder pair
could learn to map all data in the training set onto a single variable and back to the
data. Such a network would indeed accomplish completely lossless compression and
decompression. However, the network would not have extracted any useful informa-
tion from the dataset and thus, would completely fail to compress and decompress
previously unseen data. Moreover, as in the case of the dimensionality-reduction
schemes discussed in Sec. 2, we would like to analyze the latent space images and
extract new information about the data. Finally, we might also want to use the
decoder part of the autoencoder as a generator for new data. For these reasons, it
is essential that we combat overfitting as we have done in the previous chapters by
regularization.
The question then becomes how one can effectively regularize the autoencoder.
First, we need to analyze what properties we would like the latent space to fulfil.
We can identify two main properties:
1. If two input data points are close (according to some measure), their images
in the latent space should also be close. We call this property continuity.
2. Any point in the latent space should be mapped through the decoder onto a
meaningful data point, a property we call completeness.
While there are principle ways to achieve regularization along similar paths as dis-
cussed in the previous section on supervised learning, we will discuss here a solution
that is particularly useful as a generative model: the variational autoencoder (VAE).
The idea behind VAEs is for the encoder to output not just an exact point z
in the latent space, but a (factorized) Normal distribution of points, N(µ,σ). In
particular, the output of the encoder comprises two vectors, the first representing
the means µ, and the second the standard deviations σ. The input for the decoder
is then sampled from this distribution, z ∼ N(µ,σ), and the original input is recon-
structedandcomparedtotheoriginalinputfortraining. Inadditiontothestandard
loss function comparing input and output of the VAE, we further add a regulariza-
tion term to the loss function such that the distributions from the encoder are close
to a standard normal distribution N(0,1). Using the Kullback-Leibler divergence,
Eq. (2.19), to measure the deviation from the standard normal distribution, the full
University of Zurich 57
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
input output
latentspace
encoder decoder
Figure 28: Architecture of variational autoencoder. Instead of outputting
a point z in the latent space, the encoder provides a distribution N(µ,σ),
parametrized by the means µ and the standard deviations σ. The input z for
the decoder is then drawn from N(µ,σ).
loss function then reads
1 m
L (θ) = X kxin −xoutk2 +KL(N(µ ,σ )||N(0,1))
vae 2m i i 2 i i
i=1
1 m 1
= X kxin −xoutk2 + X[σ2 +µ2 −1−2logσ ]. (5.17)
2m i i 2 2 i,k i,k i,k
i=1 k
In this expression, the first term quantifies the reconstruction loss with xin the
i
input to and xout the reconstructed data from the VAE. The second term is the
i
regularization onthe latent space for eachinput data point, which for two (diagonal)
Normal distributions can be expressed in a closed form, see second line of Eq. (5.17).
This procedure regularizes the training through the introduction of noise, similar to
the dropout layer in Sec. 4. However, the regularization here not only generically
increases generalization, but also enforces the desired structure in the latent space.
The structure of a VAE is shown in Fig. 28. By enforcing the mean and variance
structure of the encoder output, the latent space fulfills the requirements outlined
above. Thistypeofstructurecanthenserveasagenerativemodelformanydifferent
data types: anything from human faces to complicated molecular structures. Hence,
the variational autoencoder goes beyond extracting information from a dataset, but
can be used for scientific discovery. Note, finally, that the general structure of the
variational autoencoder can be applied beyond the simple case introduced above.
As an example, a different distribution function can be enforced in the latent space
other than the standard Normal distribution, or a different neural network can be
used as encoder and decoder, such as a RNN.
5.5 Generative adversarial networks
Inthislastpartonunsupervisedlearning, wewillintroduceafinaltypeofgenerative
neural network, the generative adversarial network (GAN), which gained high pop-
ularity in recent years. Before getting into the details of this method, we summarize
the chapter with a brief systematic overview over the types of generative methods
we covered so far to place GANs in proper relation to them.
University of Zurich 58
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
5.5.1 Types of generative models
In this section, we have restricted ourselves to methods that are based on the maxi-
mum likelihood principle, see Sec. 5.1. The role of a model is to provide an estimate
P (x) parametrized by parameters θ of the probability distribution the data set {x }
θ i
is drawn from. The likelihood is the probability that the model assigns to the data
set
m
L(θ;{x }) = Y P (x ), (5.18)
i θ i
i=1
where m is the number of samples in the data set {x }. The goal is to choose the
i
parameters θ such as to maximize the likelihood. While we have used the maximum
likelihood principle explicitly only in the case of the RBM in Sec. 5.2, both the RNN
and the VAE of Secs 5.3 and 5.4 can be understood in this framework .
ThemethodsandtheirrespectivemodelscanbedistinguishedbythewayPmodel(x)
θ
is defined, trained, and evaluated (see Fig. 29). We differentiate between models
that define P (x) explicitly through some functional form and those, where the
θ
probability distribution is defined implicitly. The explicit models have the general
advantage that maximization of the likelihood is rather straight-forward, since we
have direct access to this function. The disadvantage is that the functional forms are
generically limiting the ability of the model to fit the data distribution or become
computationally intractable.
Among the explicit density models, we thus further distinguish between those
that represent a computationally tractable density and those that do not. An ex-
ample for tractable explicit density models are so-called fully visible belief networks
(FVBNs) that decompose the probability distribution over an n-dimensional vector
x into a product of conditional probabilities
n
PFVBN(x) = Y pFVBN(x |x ,··· ,x ). (5.19)
θ θ j 1 j−1
j=1
We can already see that once we use the model to draw new samples, this sampling
is done one entry of the vector x at a time (first x is drawn, then, knowing x , x
1 1 2
is drawn etc.). This is computationally costly and not parallelizable but is useful
for data with a sequential structure. An example of a fully visible belief network is
the RNN we discussed in Section 5.3.
Models that encode an explicit density, but require approximations to maximize
the likelihood can either be variational in nature or use stochastic methods. We
have seen examples of both. Variational methods define a lower bound to the log-
likelihood which can be maximized,
l(θ;x) ≤ logPvar(x). (5.20)
θ
The algorithm produces a maximum value of the log-likelihood that is at least as
high as the value for l(θ;x) obtained (when summed over all data points). Varia-
tional autoencoders belong to this category when the output layer is interpreted as
a probability density p (x|z). Their most obvious shortcoming is that l(θ;x) may
θ
represent a very bad lower bound to the log-likelihood (and is in general not guar-
anteed to converge to it for infinite model size), so that the distribution represented
by the model can be very different from P (x). Stochastic methods, in contrast,
data
University of Zurich 59
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
MaximumLikelihood
GenerativeModels
implicit
explicit
probabilitydensity
probabilitydensity
GAN
approximate
tractabledensity
density
RNN
(FVBN)
variational statistical
Variational RBM
Autoencoder
Figure 29: Maximum likelihood approaches to generative modeling. Unlike
the author generative models we discussed in this chapter, GANs model the proba-
bility density only implicitly, in other words we can sample from P (x) without an
θ
actual model for it.s
often rely on a Markov-chain process for their evaluation and training: The model
is defined by a probability q(x0|x) from which the next sample x0 is drawn, which
depends on the current sample x but not any others. RBMs are an example for this
class of models, where Gibbs sampling realizes the Markov chain. RBMs are guar-
anteed to converge to a random sample drawn from Prbm(x), but this convergence
θ
may be slow and as such drawing samples inefficient.
All the above classes of models allow for an explicit representation of a model
probability density function. In contrast, GANs and related models, only allow
indirect access to the probability density: The model only allows us to sample from
it. While this makes optimization potentially harder, the architecture circumvents
manyoftheotherpreviouslymentionedproblems. Inparticular, GANscangenerate
samplesinparallelwithnoneedforaMarkovchain; Therearefewrestrictionsonthe
form of the generator function (as compared to Boltzmann machines, for instance,
which have a restricted form to make Markov chain sampling work); no variational
bound is needed; and some GAN model families are known to be asymptotically
consistent (meaning that for a large enough model they are approximations to any
probability distribution).
GANs have been immensely successful in several application scenarios, most of
which in the field of image generation, and largely on the ImageNet database. Some
of the standard tasks in this context are generating an image from a sentence or
phrase that describes its content (“a blue flower”), generating realistic images from
sketches, generatingabstractmapsfromsatellitephotosgeneratingahigh-resolution
(“super-resolution”) image from a lower resolution one, or predicting a next frame in
a video. Note that for the actual assessment of the output, the likelihood might not
be relevant, as especially for images, the quality of an output is subjective. As far
as more science-related applications are concerned, GANs have been used to predict
the impact of climate change on individual houses or to generate new molecules that
have been later synthesized.
University of Zurich 60
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
realsample probabilityfor'real'
Discriminator
fakesampe
Noise Generator
Figure 30: Architecture of a GAN. A generator G(z) creates new samples (usu-
ally with z drawn randomly) and a discriminator D tries to distinguish generated
from real data.
In the light of these examples, it is of fundamental importance to understand
that GANs enable (and excel at) problems with multi-modal outputs. That means
the problems are such that a single input corresponds to many different ‘correct’
or ‘likely’ outputs. (In contrast to a mathematical function, which would always
produce the same output.) This is important to keep in mind in particular in
scientific applications, where we often search for the one answer. Only if that is not
the case, GANs can actually play out their strengths.
Let us consider image super-resolution as an illustrative example: Conventional
(deterministic) methods of increasing image resolution would necessarily lead to
some blurring or artifacts, because the information that can be encoded in the finer
pixel grid simply is not existent in the input data. A GAN, in contrast, will provide
a possibility how a realistic image could have looked if it had been taken with higher
resolution. This way they add information that may differ from the true scene of
the image that was taken – a process that is obviously not yielding a unique answer
since many versions of the information added may correspond to a realistic image.
5.5.2 The working principle of GANs
So far, we have formulated the learning of neural network models by defining a
single cost function—in this section the negative log-likelihood— which we then
minimize. WhilesuchaformulationisindeedpossibleforGANs,amoreilluminating
perspective is viewing the GAN as a game between two players, the generator (G)
and the discriminator (D), see Fig. 30. The role of G is to generate from some
random input z drawn from a simple distribution samples that could be mistaken
from being drawn from P (x). The task of D is to classify its input as generated
data
by G or coming from the data. Training should improve the performance of both D
and G at their respective tasks simultaneously. After training is completed, G can
be used to draw samples that closely resembles those drawn from P (x). The two
data
functions then are
D (x) : x 7→ binary: true/false,
θD (5.21)
G (z) : z 7→ x,
θG
where we have also indicated the two sets of parameters on which the two functions
depend: θ and θ , respectively. The game is then defined by two cost functions:
D G
The discriminator wants to minimize L (θ ;θ ) by only changing θ , while the
D D G D
generator L (θ ;θ ) by only changing θ . So, each player’s cost function depends
G G D G
on both their and the other player’s parameters, the latter of which cannot be
University of Zurich 61
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
controlled by the player. The solution to this game optimization problem is a (local)
minimum, in other words a point in (θ ,θ )-space where L (θ ;θ ) has a local
D G D D G
minimum with respect to θ and L (θ ;θ ) has a local minimum with respect to
D G G D
θ . In game theory such a solution is called a Nash equilibrium. Let us now specify
G
possible choices for the cost functions as well as for D and G.
The most important requirement of G is that it is differentiable. In contrast
to VAEs, it can thus not have discrete variables on the output layer. A typical
representation is a deep (possibly convolutional) neural network 24. Then θ are
G
the networks weights and biases. The input z is drawn from some simple prior
distribution, such as the uniform distribution or a normal distribution. The space,
where z is living in, is called the latent space as in the case of the autoencoder. It is
important that the latent space (z) has at least as high a dimension as the feature
space (x) if the model P (x) should have full support on the feature space.
θ
The training proceeds in steps. At each step, a minibatch of x is drawn from the
data set and a minibatch of z is sampled from the prior distribution. Using this,
gradient descent-type updates are performed: One update of θ using the gradient
D
of L (θ ;θ ) and one of θ using the gradient of L (θ ;θ ).
D D G G G G D
5.5.3 The cost functions
For the discriminator D, the cost function of choice is the cross-entropy as with
standard binary classifiers that have a sigmoid output. Given that the labels are ‘1’
for data and ‘0’ for samples from G, the const function reads
1 1
L (θ ;θ ) = − X log D (x )− Xlog(1−D (G (z ))), (5.22)
D D G 2N θD i 2N θD θG j
1 i 2 j
where the sums over i and j run over the respective minibatches, which in general
contain N and N points, respectively.
1 2
For the generator G, more variations of the cost functions have been explored.
Maybe the most intuitive one is
L (θ ;θ ) = −L (θ ;θ ), (5.23)
G G D D D G
which corresponds to the so-called zero-sum or minimax game. Its solution is for-
mally given by
θ? = arg min max[−L (θ ;θ )]. (5.24)
G D D G
θG θD
This form of the cost is convenient for theoretical analysis, because there is only a
single target function, which helps drawing parallels to conventional optimization.
However, other cost functions have been proven superior in practice. The reason
is that minimization can get trapped very far from an equilibrium: When the dis-
criminator manages to learn rejecting generator samples with high confidence, the
gradient of the generator will be very small, making its optimization very hard.
Instead, we can use the cross-entropy also for the generator cost function (but
this time from the generator’s perspective)
1
L (θ ;θ ) = − Xlog D (G (z )). (5.25)
G G D 2N θD θG j
2 j
24A popular Deep Conventional architecture is called DCGAN
University of Zurich 62
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
Now, the generator maximizes the probability of the discriminator being mistaken.
This way, each player still has a strong gradient when the player is loosing the game.
We observe that this version of L (θ ;θ ) has no direct dependence of the training
G D G
data. Of course, such a dependence is implicit via D, which has learned from
the training data. This indirect dependence also acts like a regularizer, preventing
overfitting: G has no possibility to directly ‘fit’ its output to training data.
5.5.4 Final Remarks on GANs
In closing, we comment on a few properties and issues of GANs, which also mark
frontiers for improvements. A general problem is that GANs are typically difficult
to train: they require large training sets and are highly susceptible to hyperparam-
eter fluctuations. It is a current topic of research to compensate for this with the
structural modification and novel loss function formulations.
Mode collapse
Mode collapse refers to one of the most obvious problems of GANs: If the generator
G does not explore the full space covered in the data set, but rather maps several
inputs z to the same output x. Full mode collapse is rather rare, but a generator
G trained on generating images may always resort to certain fragments, colors, or
patterns of images. The formal reason for mode collapse is that the simultaneous
gradient descent gravitates towards a solution, which can schematically be written
as
G? = max min[V(D,G)], (5.26)
D G
instead of the order in Eq. (5.24), where V(D,G) is the overall ‘loss function’ 25.
While the interchange of min and max might seem innocent, the reversed order
corresponds to a different solution: It is now sufficient for G to always produce one
(and the same) output that the discriminator D classified as data with very high
probability. Due to the mode collapse problem, GANs are not good at exploring
ergodically the full space of possible outputs. They rather produce few very good
possible outputs.
Onestrategytofightmodecollapseiscalledminibatch features. Insteadofletting
D rate one sample at a time, a minibatch of real and generated samples is considered
at once. It then detects whether the generated samples are unusually close to each
other.
One-sided label smoothing
Often, the discriminator D gives proper results, but shows a too confident prob-
ability 26. This overshooting confidence can be counteracted by one-sided label
smoothing and is a kind of regularization. The idea is to simply replace the target
value for the real examples in the loss function with a value 1−α < 1 . This results
in a smoother distribution of the discriminator. Why do we only perform this off-
set one-sided and not also give a small nonzero value β to the fake samples target
25The function is rather a value function, as we have not really defined a single loss function. In
Eq. (5.24), we would have V(D,G)=L (θ ;θ ).
D D G
26Note that this is not only a problem of the discriminator in GANs, but more general for
neural-network classifiers. The technique is thus useful also other binary classification problems
with neural networks.
University of Zurich 63
Machine Learning for the Sciences 5 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING
values? In this case, the optimal function for D would be
(1−α)P (x)+βP (x)
D?(x) = data θ . (5.27)
P (x)+P (x)
data θ
Consider now a range of x for which P (x) is small but P (x) is large (a “spurious
data θ
mode”). D?(x) will have a peak near this spurious mode. This means D reinforces
incorrect behavior of G and encourages G to reproduce samples that it already
makes (irrespective of whether they are anything like real data).
Using GANs with labelled data
If (at least partially) labeled data is available, using the labels when training the
discriminator D may improve the performance of G. In this constellation, G still
has the same task as before and does not interact with the labels. However, for data
with n classes D is constructed as a classifier for (n + 1) classes, where the extra
class corresponds to ‘fake’ data that D attributes to coming from G. If a data point
has a label, then this label is used as a reference in the cost function. If a datapoint
has no label, then the first n outputs of D are summed up.
Arithmetics with GANs
GANs can do linear arithmetics with inputs to add or remove abstract features from
theoutput. Inotherwords, thelatentspace, inwhichz isapoint, hasstructurethat
can be exploited. This has been demonstrated using a DCGAN trained on images of
faces: The gender and the feature ‘wearing glasses’ can be added or subtracted and
thus changed at will. Of course, such a result is only empirical, there is no formal
mathematical theory why it works.
University of Zurich 64
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
6 Interpretability of Neural Networks
In particular for applications in science, we not only want to obtain a neural network
that excels at performing a given task, but we also seek an understanding of how the
problem was solved. Ideally, we want to know the underlying principles the network
has learned, deduce causal relations, or identify abstracted notions. This is the
topic of interpretability. We will in the following first discuss how information can
beextractedingenerativemodelsfromthelatentspaceifitsdimensionissufficiently
small. Then, we discuss supervised learning and how dreaming helps us understand
the learning of neural networks better.
6.1 Interpreting latent-space representations
In the previous chapter, we have learned about the broad scope of applications of
generative models. We have seen how generative models can be used in the scientific
context to extract a compressed representation of the input data and use this latent-
space representation to generate new instances of the data. In the case of GANs, we
have already seen that there can be enough structure in the latent space to perform
simple arithmetics. It turns out that in simple enough problems with a latent space
with sufficiently small dimension, we can find a meaningful interpretation of the
representation that may help us get new insight into a given problem.
A neat example of such an interpretation of latent-space variables concerns one
of the most famous models in the history of physics: Copernicus’ heliocentric system
of the solar orbits. Via a series of precise measurements of the position of objects in
the night sky seen from Earth, Copernicus conjectured that the Sun is at the center
of the solar system and all the planets are orbiting around it. We can now ask
whether is it possible for a neural network that receives the same observed angles
to reach the same conclusion.
In a recent work, a neural network resembling an autoencoder was trained to
predict the position of Mars at a future time 27. For the purpose of training, the
network received observations of the angles of Mars and the Sun as seen from Earth
(α and α ) and the time of observation, see Fig. 31. In analogy to an autoen-
ES EM
coder, the network could choose a ‘parametrization’ of the relevant information in
the form of a (two-dimensional) latent space. When analyzing this latent-space rep-
resentation of the trained model, it turned out that the two latent neurons were
storing information in heliocentric coordinates. Specifically, the information was
stored in the latent space as a linear combination of angles between Sun and Mars,
γ and Sun and Earth γ . Just like Copernicus, the network had learned that
SM SE
the most efficient way to store the data was to transform them into the heliocentric
coordinate system.
While this intriguing example shows how generative models can be interpreted
in some simple cases, the general question of interpretability of the latent space is
still very much open and subject to ongoing research. In the instances discussed
earlier in this lecture, such as generation of molecules, where the input data is
compressed through several layers of a neural network to a high-dimensional latent
space, interpreting the latent space becomes intractably challenging.
27Iten, Metger, et al., PRL 124, 010508 (2020)
University of Zurich 65
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
Figure 31: The Copernicus problem. Relation between angles to describe the
position of Mars in the heliocentric and geocentric coordinate system within the
reference frame of the fixed stars.
6.2 Dreaming and the problem of extrapolation
Exploring the weights and intermediate activations of a neural network in order
to understand what the network has learnt very quickly becomes unfeasible or un-
informative for large network architectures. Here, we adopt a different approach,
where we focus on the inputs to the neural network, rather than the intermediate
activations, to better understand what the network has learned.
More precisely, let us consider a neural network classifier F (x), depending on
θ
the parameters θ = {W,b} with weights W and biases b, which maps an input x to
a probability distribution over n classes F (x) ∈ Rn, in other words
θ
F (x) ≥ 0 and X F (x) = 1. (6.1)
θ,i θ,i
i
In the previous sections, We minimized the distance between the output of the
network F (x) and a chosen target output y, which we did by minimizing a loss
θ
function, such as
L = |F (x)−y|2. (6.2)
θ
However, unlike in supervised learning, where we minimized the loss minimization
withrespecttotheparametersθ ofthenetwork, wearehereinterestedinminimizing
with respect to the input x while keeping the parameters θ fixed. For this purpose,
we again use gradient descent,
∂L
x 7→ x−η , (6.3)
∂x
where η is the learning rate. With a sufficient number of iterations, an initial input
x0 will be transformed into a final input x∗, such that
F (x∗) ≈ y. (6.4)
θ
By choosing the target output to correspond to a particular class, y∗ = (1,0,0,...)
as an example, we are essentially finding examples of inputs which the network
would classify as belonging to the chosen class. This procedure is called dreaming.
University of Zurich 66
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
“Healthy” “Unhealthy” “Unhealthy”
“Healthy” “Unhealthy” “Healthy”
99% confidence 98% confidence 97% confidence
Figure 32: Plant leaves. Top: Some samples from the plants dataset. Bottom:
Samples generated by using the "dreaming" procedure starting from random noise.
We will apply this technique to a binary classification example. We consider a
dataset consisting of images of healthy and unhealthy plant leaves 28. Some samples
from the dataset are shown in the top row of Fig. 32. After training a deep con-
volutional network to classify the leaves (reaching a test accuracy of around 95%),
we start with a random image as our initial input x0 and perform gradient descent
on the input, as described above, to arrive at the final image x∗ which our network
confidently classifies.
InthebottomrowofFig.32, weshowthreeexamplesproducedusingthe‘dream-
ing’ technique. On first sight, it might be astonishing that the final image actually
does not even remotely resemble a leaf. How could it be that the network has
such a high accuracy of around 95%, yet we have here a confidently classified im-
age which is essentially just noise. While this seems surprising at first, a closer
inspection reveals the problem: The noisy image x∗ looks nothing like the samples
in the dataset with which we trained our network. By feeding this image into our
network, we are asking the network to make an extrapolation, which, as can be seen,
leads to uncontrolled behavior. This is a key issue which plagues most data-driven
machine-learning approaches. With few exceptions, it is very difficult to train a
model capable of performing reliable extrapolations. Since scientific research is of-
ten in the business of making extrapolations, this is an extremely important point
of caution to keep in mind.
While it might seem obvious that any model should only be predictive for data
that ‘resembles’ those in the training set, the precise meaning of ‘resembles’ is ac-
tually more subtle than one imagines. For example, if one trains a ML model using
a dataset of images captured using a Canon camera but subsequently decide to use
the model to make predictions on images taken with a Nikon camera, we could ac-
28Source: https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/tywbtsjrjv/1
University of Zurich 67
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
tually be in for a surprise. Even though the images may ‘resemble’ each other to
our naked eye, the different cameras can have a different noise profile which might
not be perceptible to the human eye. We will see in the next section that even such
minute image distortions can already be sufficient to completely confuse a model.
6.3 Adversarial attacks
As we have seen, it is possible to modify the input x so that the corresponding
model approximates a chosen target output. This concept can also be applied to
generate adverserial examples, in other words images which have been intentionally
modified to cause a model to misclassify them. As a further requirement, we usually
want the modification to be minimal, almost imperceptible to the human eye.
One common method for generating adversarial examples is known as the fast
gradient sign method (FSGM). Starting from an input x0 which our model correctly
classifies, we choose a target output y∗ which corresponds to a wrong classification,
andfollowtheproceduredescribedintheprevioussectionwithaslightmodification.
Instead of updating the input according to Eq. (6.3) we use the following update
rule:
!
∂L
x 7→ x−η sign , (6.5)
∂x
where L is given be Eq. (6.2). The sign(...) ∈ {−1,1} both serves to enhance the
signal and also acts as constraint to limit the size of the modification. By choosing
η = (cid:15) andperformingonlyT iterations, wecanthenguaranteethateachcomponent
T
of the final input x∗ satisfies
|x∗ −x0| ≤ (cid:15). (6.6)
i i
Consequently, our final image x∗ is only minimally modified. We summarize this
algorithm as follows:
Algorithm 5: Fast Gradient Sign Method
Input: A classification model F , a loss function L, an initial image
θ
x0, a target label y∗, perturbation size (cid:15) and number of
iterations T
Output: Adversarial example x∗ with |x∗ −x0| ≤ (cid:15)
i i
η = (cid:15)/T ;
for i=1...T do
(cid:16) (cid:17)
x = x−η sign ∂L ;
∂x
end
This process of generating adversarial examples is called an adversarial attack,
which we can classify under two broad categories: white box and black box attacks.
In a white box attack, the attacker has full access to the network F and is thus
θ
able to compute or estimate the gradients with respect to the input. On the other
hand, in a black box attack, the adversarial examples are generated without using
the target network F . In this case, a possible strategy for the attacker is to train
θ
his own model G , find an adversarial example for his model and use it against his
θ
University of Zurich 68
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
+ 0.01 =
<latexit sha1_base64="Uq9hQrleaI6OL5WW9wlQj7F7mts=">AAACFXicbVDLSgMxFM3UVx1fY126CRZBEMpMFXRZdOOygn1AZyiZNNOGZjJDckcspd/hzq3+hDtx69p/8CNM21nY1gMhJ+fey7k5YSq4Btf9tgpr6xubW8Vte2d3b//AOSw1dZIpyho0EYlqh0QzwSVrAAfB2qliJA4Fa4XD22m99ciU5ol8gFHKgpj0JY84JWCkrlM6xz7GbsX1zO0Dj5nuOmXzngGvEi8nZZSj3nV+/F5Cs5hJoIJo3fHcFIIxUcCpYBPbzzRLCR2SPusYKokxCcaz3Sf41Cg9HCXKHAl4pv6dGJNY61Ecms6YwEAv16bif7VOBtF1MOYyzYBJOjeKMoEhwdMgcI8rRkGMDCFUcbMrpgOiCAUT14ILKCJ1SpT538S2TTzechirpFmteBeV6v1luXaTB1VEx+gEnSEPXaEaukN11EAUPaEX9IrerGfr3fqwPuetBSufOUILsL5+AUktnPI=</latexit> ⇥ <latexit sha1_base64="1LPVExGShI5/e/wN46yy9j0Q6Ro=">AAACAnicbVBNS8NAEN34WeNX1aOXYBE8laQKehGKXjy2YD+gDWWznbRLN5uwOxFK6M2bV/0T3sSrf8T/4I9w2+ZgWx8MPN6bYWZekAiu0XW/rbX1jc2t7cKOvbu3f3BYPDpu6jhVDBosFrFqB1SD4BIayFFAO1FAo0BAKxjdT/3WEyjNY/mI4wT8iA4kDzmjaKT6ba9YcsvuDM4q8XJSIjlqveJPtx+zNAKJTFCtO56boJ9RhZwJmNjdVENC2YgOoGOopBFoP5sdOnHOjdJ3wliZkujM1L8TGY20HkeB6YwoDvWyNxX/8zophjd+xmWSIkg2XxSmwsHYmX7t9LkChmJsCGWKm1sdNqSKMjTZLGxBRaVOqDL/TWzbxOMth7FKmpWyd1mu1K9K1bs8qAI5JWfkgnjkmlTJA6mRBmEEyAt5JW/Ws/VufVif89Y1K585IQuwvn4B67yXlA==</latexit>
“Healthy” “Unhealthy”
87.4% confidence 87.8% confidence
+ 0.01 =
<latexit sha1_base64="Uq9hQrleaI6OL5WW9wlQj7F7mts=">AAACFXicbVDLSgMxFM3UVx1fY126CRZBEMpMFXRZdOOygn1AZyiZNNOGZjJDckcspd/hzq3+hDtx69p/8CNM21nY1gMhJ+fey7k5YSq4Btf9tgpr6xubW8Vte2d3b//AOSw1dZIpyho0EYlqh0QzwSVrAAfB2qliJA4Fa4XD22m99ciU5ol8gFHKgpj0JY84JWCkrlM6xz7GbsX1zO0Dj5nuOmXzngGvEi8nZZSj3nV+/F5Cs5hJoIJo3fHcFIIxUcCpYBPbzzRLCR2SPusYKokxCcaz3Sf41Cg9HCXKHAl4pv6dGJNY61Ecms6YwEAv16bif7VOBtF1MOYyzYBJOjeKMoEhwdMgcI8rRkGMDCFUcbMrpgOiCAUT14ILKCJ1SpT538S2TTzechirpFmteBeV6v1luXaTB1VEx+gEnSEPXaEaukN11EAUPaEX9IrerGfr3fqwPuetBSufOUILsL5+AUktnPI=</latexit> ⇥ <latexit sha1_base64="1LPVExGShI5/e/wN46yy9j0Q6Ro=">AAACAnicbVBNS8NAEN34WeNX1aOXYBE8laQKehGKXjy2YD+gDWWznbRLN5uwOxFK6M2bV/0T3sSrf8T/4I9w2+ZgWx8MPN6bYWZekAiu0XW/rbX1jc2t7cKOvbu3f3BYPDpu6jhVDBosFrFqB1SD4BIayFFAO1FAo0BAKxjdT/3WEyjNY/mI4wT8iA4kDzmjaKT6ba9YcsvuDM4q8XJSIjlqveJPtx+zNAKJTFCtO56boJ9RhZwJmNjdVENC2YgOoGOopBFoP5sdOnHOjdJ3wliZkujM1L8TGY20HkeB6YwoDvWyNxX/8zophjd+xmWSIkg2XxSmwsHYmX7t9LkChmJsCGWKm1sdNqSKMjTZLGxBRaVOqDL/TWzbxOMth7FKmpWyd1mu1K9K1bs8qAI5JWfkgnjkmlTJA6mRBmEEyAt5JW/Ws/VufVif89Y1K585IQuwvn4B67yXlA==</latexit>
“Unhealthy” “Healthy”
94.4% confidence 99.6% confidence
Figure 33: Adversarial examples. Generated using the fast gradient sign method
with T = 1 iteration and (cid:15) = 0.01. The target model is Google’s InceptionV3 deep
convolutional network with a test accuracy of ∼ 95% on the binary ("Healthy" vs
"Unhealthy") plants dataset.
target F without actually having access to it. Although it might seem surprising,
θ
this strategy has been found to work albeit with a lower success rate as compared
to white box methods. We illustrate these concepts in the example below.
6.3.1 Example
We use the same plant-leaves-classification example as above. The target model F
θ
which we want to ’attack’ is a pretrained model using Google’s well known Incep-
tionV3 deep convolutional neural network containing over 20 million parameters29.
The model achieved a test accuracy of ∼ 95%. Assuming we have access to the
gradients of the model F , we can consider a white box attack. Starting from an
θ
image in the dataset which the target model correctly classifies and applying the
fast gradient sign method (Alg. 5) with (cid:15) = 0.01 and T = 1, we obtain an adversar-
ial image which differs from the original image by almost imperceptible amount of
noise as depicted on the left of Fig. 33. Any human would still correctly identify the
image but yet the network, which has around 95% accuracy has completely failed.
If, however, the gradients and outputs of the target model F are hidden, the
θ
above white box attack strategy becomes unfeasible. In this case, we can adopt the
following ‘black box attack’ strategy. We train a secondary model G , and then
θ0
29This is an example of transfer learning. The base model, InceptionV3, has been trained on
a different classification dataset, ImageNet, with over 1000 classes. To apply this network to our
binary classification problem, we simply replace the top layer with a simple duo-output dense
softmax layer. We keep the weights of the base model fixed and only train the top layer.
University of Zurich 69
Machine Learning for the Sciences 6 INTERPRETABILITY
Figure 34: Black Box Adversarial Attack.
applying the FGSM algorithm to G to generate adversarial examples for G . Note
θ0 θ0
that it is not necessary for G to have the same network architecture as the target
θ0
model F . In fact, it is possible that we do not even know the architecture of our
θ
target model.
LetusconsideranotherpretrainednetworkbasedonMobileNet containingabout
2 million parameters. After retraining the top classification layer of this model to a
test accuracy of ∼ 95%, we apply the FGSM algorithm to generate some adversarial
examples. If we now test these examples on our target model F , we notice a
θ
significant drop in the accuracy as shown on the graph on the right of Fig. 34. The
fact that the drop in accuracy is greater for the black box generated adversarial
images as compared to images with random noise (of the same scale) added to it,
shows that adversarial images have some degree of transferability between models.
As a side note, on the left of Fig. 34 we observe that black box attacks are more
effective when only T = 1 iteration of the FGSM algorithm is used, contrary to the
situationforthewhiteboxattack. Thisisbecause, withmoreiterations, themethod
has a tendency towards overfitting the secondary model, resulting in adversarial
images which are less transferable.
These forms of attacks highlight not only a problem for the scientific application
of neural networks, but a serious vulnerability of data-driven machine-learning tech-
niques in general. Defending against such attack is thus an active area of research,
buts is largely a cat and mouse game between the attacker and defender.
University of Zurich 70
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
7 Reinforcement Learning
In the previous sections, wehave introduced data-based learning, where we are given
a dataset {x } for training. Depending on whether we are given labels y with each
i i
data point, we have further divided our learning task as either being supervised or
unsupervised, respectively. The aim of machine learning is then to classify unseen
data (supervised), or extract useful information from the data and generate new
data resembling the data in the given dataset (unsupervised). However, the concept
of learning as commonly understood certainly encompasses other forms of learning
that are not falling into these data-driven categories.
An example for a form of learning not obviously covered by supervised or unsu-
pervised learning is learning how to walk: in particular, a child that learns how to
walk does not first collect data on all possible ways of successfully walking to extract
rules on how to walk best. Rather, the child performs an action, sees what happens,
and then adjusts their actions accordingly. This kind of learning thus happens best
‘on-the-fly’, in other words while performing the attempted task. Reinforcement
learning formalizes this different kind of learning and introduces suitable (compu-
tational) methods.
As we will explain in the following, the framework of reinforcement learning
considers an agent that interacts with an environment through actions, which, on
the one hand, changes the state of the agent and on the other hand, leads to a
reward. Whereas we tried to minimize a loss function in the previous sections,
the main goal of reinforcement learning is to maximize this reward by learning an
appropriate policy. One way of reformulating this task is to find a value function,
whichassociatestoeachstate(orstate-actionpair)avalue,orexpectedtotalreward.
Note that, importantly, to perform our learning task we do not require knowledge, a
model, of the environment. All that is needed is feedback to our actions in the form
of a reward signal and a new state. We stress again that we study in the following
methods that learn at each time step 30.
The framework of reinforcement learning is very powerful and versatile. Exam-
ples include:
• Wecantrainarobottoperformatask, suchasusinganarmtocollectsamples.
The state of the agent is the position of the robot arm, the actions move the
arm, and the agent receives a reward for each sample collected.
• We can use reinforcement learning to optimize experiments, such as chem-
ical reactions. In this case, the state contains the experimental conditions,
such as temperature, solvent composition, or pH and the actions are all pos-
sible ways of changing these state variables. The reward is a function of the
yield, the purity, or the cost. Note that reinforcement learning can be used
at several levels of this process: While one agent might be trained to target
the experimental conditions directly, another agent could be trained to reach
the target temperature by adjusting the electrical current running through a
heating element.
30Note that alternatively, one could also devise methods, where an agent tries a policy many
times and judges only the final outcome.
University of Zurich 71
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
• We can train an agent to play a game, with the state being the current state of
the game and a reward is received once for winning. The most famous example
for such an agent is Google’s AlphaGo, which outperforms humans in the
game of Go. A possible way of applying reinforcement learning in the sciences
is to phrase a problem as a game. An example, where such rephrasing was
successfully applied, is error correction for (topological) quantum computers.
• Inthefollowing,wewilluseatoyexampletoillustratetheconceptsintroduced:
We want to train an agent to help us with the plants in our lab: in particular,
the state of the agent is the water level. The agent can turn on and off a
growth lamp and it can send us a message if we need to show up to water the
plants. Obviously, we would like to optimize the growth of the plants and not
have them die.
As a full discussion of reinforcement learning goes well beyond the scope of this
lecture, we will focus in the following on the main ideas and terminology with no
claim of completeness.
7.1 Exploration versus exploitation
We begin our discussion with a simple example that demonstrates some important
aspects of reinforcement learning. In particular, we discuss a situation, where the
reward does not depend on a state, but only on the action taken. The agent is a
doctor, who has to choose from n actions, the treatments, for a given disease, with
the reward depending on the recovery of the patient. The doctor ‘learns on the job’
and tries to find the best treatment. The value of a treatment a ∈ A is denoted by
q (a) = E(r), the expectation value of our reward.
∗
Unfortunately, there is an uncertainty in the outcome of each treatment, such
that it is not enough to perform each treatment just once to know the best one.
Rather, onlybyperformingatreatmentmanytimeswefindagoodestimateQ (a) ≈
t
q (a). Here, Q (a) is our estimate of the value of a after t (time-) steps. Obviously,
∗ t
we should not perform a bad treatment many times, only to have a better estimate
for its failure. We could instead try each action once and then continue for the rest
of the time with the action that performed best. This strategy is called a greedy
method and exploits our knowledge of the system. However, also this strategy bears
risks, as the uncertainty in the outcome of the treatment means that we might use
a suboptimal treatment. It is thus crucial to explore other actions. This dilemma is
called the ‘conflict between exploration and exploitation’. A common strategy is to
use the best known action a = argmax Q (a) most of the time, but with probability
∗ a t
(cid:15) chose randomly one of the other actions. This strategy of choosing the next action
is called (cid:15)-greedy.
7.2 Finite Markov decision process
After this introductory example, we introduce the idealized form of reinforcement
learning with a Markov decision process (MDP). At each time step t, the agent
starts from a state S ∈ S, performs an action A ∈ A, which, through interaction
t t
with the environment, leads to a reward R ∈ R and moves the agent to a new
t+1
University of Zurich 72
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
state
action
agent
reward
environment
Figure 35: Markov decision process. Schematic of the agent-environment inter-
action.
state S . This agent-environment interaction is schematically shown in Fig. 35.
t+1
Note that we assume the space of all actions, states, and rewards to be finite, such
that we talk about a finite MDP.
For our toy example, the sensor we have only shows whether the water level
is high (h) or low (l), so that the state space of our agent is S = {h,l}. In both
cases, our agent can choose to turn the growth lamps on or off, or in the case of
low water, he can choose to send us a message so we can go and water the plants.
The available actions are thus A = {on,off,text}. When the growth lamps are on,
the plants grow faster, which leads to a bigger reward, r > r > 0. Furthermore,
on off
there is a penalty for texting us, but an even bigger penalty for letting the plants
die, 0 > r > r .
text fail
A model of the environment provides the probability of ending in state s0 with
reward r, starting from a state s and choosing the action a, p(s0,r|s,a). In this case,
the dynamics of the Markov decision process is completely characterized. Note that
the process is a Markov process, since the next state and reward only depend on the
current state and chosen action.
In our toy example, being in state ‘high’ and having the growth lamp on will
providearewardofr andkeeptheagentin‘high’withprobabilityp(h,r |h,on) =
on on
α, while with 1 − α the agent will end up with a low water level. However, if the
agent turns the lamps off, the reward is r and the probability of staying in state
off
‘high’ is α0 > α. For the case of a low water level, the probability of staying in low
despite the lamps on is p(l,r |l,on) = β, which means that with probability 1−β,
on
our plants run out of water. In this case, we will need to get new plants and we
will water them, of course, such that p(h,r |l,on) = 1 − β. As with high water
fail
levels, turning the lamps off reduces our rewards, but increases our chance of not
losing the plants, β0 > β. Finally, if the agent should choose to send us a text, we
will refill the water, such that p(h,r |l,text) = 1. The whole Markov process is
text
summarized in the transition graph in Fig. 36.
From the probability for the next reward and state, we can also calculate the
expected reward starting from state s and choosing action a, namely
r(s,a) = X r X p(s0,r|s,a). (7.1)
r∈R s0∈S
Obviously, the value of an action now depends on the state the agent is in, such that
we write for the optimal total reward q (s,a). Alternatively, we can also assign to
∗
each state a value v (s), which quantizes the optimal reward from this state.
∗
Finally, we can define what we want to accomplish by learning: knowing our
current state s, we want to know what action to choose such that our future total
University of Zurich 73
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
on on
text
high low
off off
Figure 36: Transition graph of the MDP for the plant-watering agent. The
states ‘high’ and ‘low’ are denoted with large circles, the actions with small black
circles, and the arrows correspond to the probabilities and rewards.
reward is maximized. Importantly, we want to accomplish this without any prior
knowledge of how to optimize rewards directly. This poses yet another question:
what is the total reward? We usually distinguish tasks with a well-defined end point
t = T, so-called episodic tasks, from continuous tasks that go on for ever. The total
reward for the former is simply the total return
G = R +R +R +···+R . (7.2)
t t+1 t+2 t+3 T
As such a sum is not guaranteed to converge for a continuous task, the total reward
is the discounted return
∞
G = R +γR +γ2R +··· = X γkR , (7.3)
t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+k+1
k=0
with 0 ≤ γ < 1 the discount rate. Equation (7.3) is more general and can be used
for an episodic task by setting γ = 1 and R = 0 for t > T. Note that for rewards
t
which are bound, this sum is guaranteed to converge to a finite value.
7.3 Policies and value functions
A policy π(a|s) is the probability of choosing the action a when in state s. We can
thusformulateourlearningtaskasfindingthepolicythatmaximizesourrewardand
reinforcement learning as adapting an agent’s policy as a result of its experience.
For a given policy, we can define the value function of a state s as the expected
return from starting in that state and using the policy function π for choosing all
our future actions. We can write this as
v (s) ≡ E (G |S = s). (7.4)
π π t t
Alternatively, we can define the action-value function of π as
q (s,a) ≡ E (G |S = s,A = a). (7.5)
π π t t t
This is the expectation value for the return starting in state s and choosing action
a, but using the policy π for all future actions. Note that one of the key ideas
University of Zurich 74
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
of reinforcement learning is to use such value functions, instead of the policy, to
organize our learning process.
The value function of Eq. (7.4) satisfies a self-consistency equation,
v (s) = E (R +γG |S = s) (7.6)
π π t+1 t+1 t
= X π(a|s)X p(s0,r|s,a)[r+γv (s0)]. (7.7)
π
a s0,r
This equation, known as the Bellman equation, relates the value of state s to the
expected reward and the (discounted) value of the next state after having chosen an
action under the policy π(a|s).
As an example, we can write the Bellman equation for the strategy of always
leaving the lamps on in our toy model. Then, we find the system of linear equations
v (h) = p(h,r |h,on)[r +γv (h)]+p(l,r |h,on)[r +γv (l)]
on on on on on on on
= r +γ[αv (h)+(1−α)v (l)], (7.8)
on on on
v (l) = β[r +γv (l)]+(1−β)[r +γv (h)], (7.9)
on on on fail on
from which we can solve easily for v (h) and v (l).
on on
Instead of calculating the value function for all possible policies, we can directly
try and find the optimal policy π , for which v (s) > v (s) for all policies π0 and
∗ π∗ π0
s ∈ S. For this policy, we find the Bellman optimality equations
v (s) = maxq (s,a)
∗ ∗
a
= maxE(R +γv (S )|S = s,A = a) (7.10)
t+1 ∗ t+1 t t
a
= maxX p(s0,r|s,a)[r+γv (s0)]. (7.11)
∗
a
s0,r
Importantly, the Bellman optimality equations do not depend on the actual policy
anymore. As such, Eq. (7.11) defines a non-linear system of equations, which for
a sufficiently simple MDP can be solved explicitly. For our toy example, the two
equations for the value functions are
( r +γ[αv (h)+(1−α)v (l)]
v (h) = max on ∗ ∗ (7.12)
∗ r +γ[α0v (h)+(1−α0)v (l)]
off ∗ ∗
and
 β[r +γv (l)]+(1−β)[r +γv (h)]
 on ∗ fail ∗
v (l) = max β0[r +γv (l)]+(1−β0)[r +γv (h)] . (7.13)
∗ off ∗ fail ∗
 r +γv (h)
text ∗
Note that equivalent equations to Eqs. (7.10) and (7.11) hold for the state-action
value function
q (s,a) = E(R +γmaxq (S ,a0)) (7.14)
∗ t+1 ∗ t+1
a0
= X p(s0,r|s,a)[r+γmaxq (s0,a0)]. (7.15)
∗
a0
s0,r
Once we know v , the optimal policy π (a|s) is the greedy policy that chooses
∗ ∗
the action a that maximizes the right-hand side of Eq. (7.11). If, instead, we know
University of Zurich 75
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
q (s,a), then we can directly choose the action which maximizes q (s,a), namely
∗ ∗
π (a|s) = argmax q (s,a0), without looking one step ahead.
∗ a0 ∗
WhileEqs(7.11)or(7.15)canbesolvedexplicitlyforasufficientlysimplesystem,
such an approach, which corresponds to an exhaustive search, is often not feasible.
Inthefollowing,wedistinguishtwolevelsofcomplexity: First,iftheexplicitsolution
is too hard, but we can still keep track of all possible value functions—we can choose
either the state or the state-action value function—we can use a tabular approach.
A main difficulty in this case is the evaluation of a policy, or prediction, which
is needed to improve on the policy. While various methods for policy evaluation
and policy improvement exist, we will discuss in the following an approach called
temporal-difference learning. Second, in many cases the space of possible states is
much too large to allow for a complete knowledge of all value functions. In this case,
we additionally need to approximate the value functions. For this approximation,
we can use the methods encountered in the previous chapters, such as (deep) neural
networks.
7.4 Temporal-difference learning
If we cannot explicitly solve the Bellman optimality equations—the case most often
encountered—we need to find the optimal policy by some other means. If the state
space is still small enough to keep track of all value functions, we can tabulate the
valuefunctionforallthestatesandagivenpolicyandthus,speakoftabular methods.
The most straight-forward approach, referred to as policy iteration, proceeds in two
steps: First, given a policy π(a|s), the value function v (s) is evaluated. Second,
π
after this policy evaluation, we can improve on the given policy π(a|s) using the
greedy policy
π0(a|s) = argmax X p(s0,r|s,a)[r+γv (s0)]. (7.16)
a π
s0,r
Thissecondstepiscalledpolicy improvement. Thefullpolicyiterationthenproceeds
iteratively
π → v → π → v → π → ··· (7.17)
0 π0 1 π1 2
until convergence to v and hence π . Note that, indeed, the Bellman optimality
∗ ∗
equation (7.11) is the fixed-point equation for this procedure.
Policy iteration requires a full evaluation of the value function of π for every
k
iterationk, whichisusuallyacostlycalculation. Insteadoffullyevaluatingthevalue
functionunderafixedpolicy, wecanalsodirectlytryandcalculatetheoptimalvalue
function by iteratively solving the Bellman optimality equation,
v[k+1](s) = maxX p(s0,r|s,a)[r+γv[k](s0)]. (7.18)
a
s0,r
Note that once we have converged to the optimal value function, the optimal pol-
icy is given by the greedy policy corresponding to the right-hand side of Eq. (7.16)
An alternative way of interpreting this iterative procedure is to perform policy im-
provement every time we update the value function, instead of finishing the policy
evaluation each time before policy improvement. This procedure is called value iter-
ation and is an example of a generalized policy iteration, the idea of allowing policy
evaluation and policy improvement to interact while learning.
University of Zurich 76
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Inthefollowing, wewanttousesuchageneralizedpolicyiterationschemeforthe
(common) case, where we do not have a model for our environment. In this model-
free case, we have to perform the (generalized) policy improvement using only our
interactions with the environment. It is instructive to first think about how to
evaluate a policy. We have seen in Eqs. (7.4) and (7.6) that the value function can
also be written as an expectation value,
v (s) = E (G |S = s) (7.19)
π π t t
= E (R +γv (S )|S = s). (7.20)
π t+1 π t+1 t
We can thus either try to directly sample the expectation value of the first line—this
can be done using Monte Carlo sampling over possible state-action sequences—or
wetrytousethesecondlinetoiterativelysolveforthevaluefunction. Inbothcases,
we start from state S and choose an action A according to the policy we want to
t t
evaluate. The agent’s interaction with the environment results in the reward R
t+1
and the new state S . Using the second line, Eq. (7.20), goes under the name
t+1
temporal-difference learning and is in many cases the most efficient method. In
particular, we make the following updates
v[k+1](S ) = v[k](S )+α[R +γv[k](S )−v[k](S )]. (7.21)
π t π t t+1 π t+1 π t
The expression in the brackets is the difference between our new estimate and the
old estimate of the value function and α < 1 is a learning rate. As we look one
step ahead for our new estimate, the method is called one-step temporal difference
method.
We now want to use generalized policy iteration to find the optimal value. We
already encountered a major difficulty when improving a policy using a value func-
tion based on experience in Sec. 7.1: it is difficult to maintain enough exploration
over possible action-state pairs and not end up exploiting the current knowledge.
However, this sampling is crucial for both Monte Carlo methods and the temporal-
difference learning we discuss here. In the following, we will discuss two different
methodsofperformingtheupdates, bothworkingonthestate-actionvaluefunction,
instead of the value function. Both have in common that we look one step ahead
to update the state-action value function. A general update should then be of the
form
q[k+1](S ,a) = q[k](S ,a)+α[R +γq[k](S ,a0)−q[k](S ,a)] (7.22)
t t t+1 t+1 t
and the question is then what action a we should take for the state-action pair and
what action a0 should be taken in the new state S .
t+1
Starting from a state S , we first choose an action A according to a policy
0 0
derived from the current estimate of the state-action value function 31, such as an
(cid:15)-greedy policy. For the first approach, we perform updates as
q[k+1](S ,A ) = q[k](S ,A )+α[R +γq[k](S ,A )−q[k](S ,A )]. (7.23)
t t t t t+1 t+1 t+1 t t
As above, we are provided a reward R and a new state S through our interac-
t+1 t+1
tion with the environment. To choose the action A , we again use a policy derived
t+1
31We assume here an episodic task. At the very beginning of training, we may initialize the
state-action value function randomly.
University of Zurich 77
Machine Learning for the Sciences 7 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
from q[k](s = S ,a). Since we are using the policy for choosing the action in the
t+1
next state S , this approach is called on-policy. Further, since in this particular
t+1
case we use the quintuple S ,A ,R ,S ,A , this algorithm is referred to as
t t t+1 t+1 t+1
Sarsa. Finally, note that for the next step, we use S ,A as the state-action pair
t+1 t+1
for which q[k](s,a) is updated.
Alternatively, we only keep the state S from the last step and first choose the
t
action A for the update using the current policy. Then, we choose our action from
t
stateS ingreedyfashion,whicheffectivelyusesq[k](s = S ,a)asanapproximation
t+1 t
for q (s = S ,a). This leads to
∗ t
q[k+1](S ,A ) = q[k](S ,A )+α[R +γmaxq[k](S ,a)−q[k](S ,A )]. (7.24)
t t t t t+1 t+1 t t
a
and is a so-called off-policy approach. The algorithm, a variant of which is used in
AlphaGo, is called Q-learning.
7.5 Function approximation
When the state-action space becomes very large, we face two problems: First, we
can not use tabular methods anymore, since we can not store all values. Second and
more important, even if we could store all the values, the probability of visiting all
state-action pairs with the above algorithms becomes increasingly unlikely, in other
words most states will never be visited during training. Ideally, we should thus
identify states that are ‘similar’, assign them ‘similar’ value, and choose ‘similar’
actions when in these states. This grouping of similar states is exactly the kind
of generalization we tried to achieve in the previous sections. Not surprisingly,
reinforcement learning is most successful when combined with neural networks.
In particular, we can parametrize a value function vˆ (s;θ) and try to find pa-
π
rameters θ such that vˆ (s;θ) ≈ v (s). This approximation can be done using the
π π
supervised-learning methods encountered in the previous sections, where the target,
or label, is given by the new estimate. In particular, we can use the mean squared
error to formulate a gradient descent method for an update procedure analogous
to Eq. (7.21). Starting from a state S and choosing an action A according to the
policy π(a|S), we update the parameters
θ[k+1] = θ[k] +α[R+γvˆ (S0;θ[k])−vˆ (S;θ[k])]∇vˆ (S;θ[k]) (7.25)
π π π
with 0 < α < 1 again the learning rate. Note that, even though the new estimate
also depends on θ[k], we only take the derivative with respect to the old estimate.
This method is thus referred to as semi-gradient method. In a similar fashion, we
can reformulate the Sarsa algorithm introduced for generalized gradient iteration.
University of Zurich 78
Machine Learning for the Sciences 8 CONCLUDING REMARKS
8 Concluding remarks
In this lecture, ‘Machine Learning for the Sciences’, we have discussed common
structures and algorithms of machine learning to analyze data or learn policies to
achieve a given goal. Even though machine learning is often associated with neu-
ral networks, we have first introduced methods commonly known from statistical
analysis, such as linear regression. Neural networks, which we used for most of this
lecture, are much less controlled than these conventional methods. As an example,
we do not try to find an absolute minimum in the optimization procedure, but one
of many almost degenerate minima. This uncertainty might feel like a loss of control
to a scientist, but it is crucial for the successful generalization of the trained network
The goal of our discussions was not to provide the details needed for an actual
implementation—as all standard algorithms are provided by standard libraries such
as TensorFlow or PyTorch, this is indeed not necessary—but to give an overview
over the most important terminology and the common algorithms. We hope that
such an overview is helpful for reading the literature and deciding, whether a given
method is suitable for your own problems.
To help with the use of machine learning in your own research, here a few lessons
for a successful machine learner:
1. Your learning result can only be as good as your data set.
2. Understand your data, its structure and biases.
3. Try simpler algorithms first.
4. Don’t be afraid of lingo. Not everything that sounds fancy actually is.
5. Neural networks are better at interpolating than extrapolating.
6. Neural networks represent smooth functions well, not discontinuous or spiky
ones.
Regardingtheuseofmachinelearninginascientificsetting, severalpointsshould
be kept in mind. First, unlike in many other applications, scientific data often
exhibits specific structure, correlations, or biases, which are known beforehand. It is
thus important to use our prior knowledge in the construction of the neural network
and the loss function. There are also many situations, where the output of the
network has to satisfy conditions, such as symmetries, to be meaningful in a given
context. This should ideally be included in the definition of the network. Finally,
scientific analysis needs to be well defined and reproducible. Machine learning,
with its intrinsic stochastic nature, does not easily satisfy these conditions. It is
thus crucial to document carefully the architecture and all hyperparameters of a
network and training. The results should be compared to conventional statistical
methods, their robustness to variations in the structure of the network and the
hyperparameters should be checked.
University of Zurich 79
Machine Learning for the Sciences 8 CONCLUDING REMARKS
dlearning
e
s
vi
er
p RNN
u logistic
s CNN (sequential) regression
(spatial)
dense
networks SVM
al
(bruteforceu)r
e
n
reg
r
r
id
e
g
ss
e
ion n
classificatio
n
B
(
e
b
l
r
l
u
m
te
a
fo
n
rc
E
e)
q. r
e i
o n
si
f
s o
e
linear e g r o p Sarsa r c e
regression r tim (on-policy) m
a e
l
p Q-learning n
PCA s tru
c tu
re
y
cil o (off-policy)
n r
a
el t
t-SNE
generation
app
fu
ro
n
x
c
i
t
m
io
a
n
tion g
ni
neuralnetworks
(V)AE GAN
u
n
s u RBM RNN
p
e
rv
ised
learning
PDM
Machine Learning
atask-orientedoverview
©MHF
Figure 37: Machine Learning overview. Methods covered in this lecture from
the point of view of tasks.
University of Zurich 80
