A review of clustering models in educational data
science towards fairness-aware learning
Tai Le Quy1, Gunnar Friege2,Eirini Ntoutsi3
1L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover
Address: Appelstr. 4, 30167 Hannover, Germany
Email: tai@l3s.de
ORCID: 0000-0001-8512- 5854
2Institute for Didactics of Mathematics and Physics, Leibniz University Hannover
Address: Welfengarten 1A, 30167 Hannover, Germany
Email: friege@idmp.uni-hannover.de
ORCID: 0000-0003-3878-9230
3Research Institute CODE, Bundeswehr University Munich
Address: Carl-Wery-Str. 18, D-81739 München, Germany
Email: eirini.ntoutsi@unibw.de
ORCID: 0000-0001-5729-1003
Abstract. Ensuring fairness is essential for every education system. Machine
learning is increasingly supporting the education system and educational data sci-
ence (EDS) domain, from decision support to educational activities and learning
analytics. However, the machine learning-based decisions can be biased because
the algorithms may generate the results based on students’ protected attributes
such as race or gender. Clustering is an important machine learning technique to
explore student data in order to support the decision-maker, as well as support ed-
ucational activities, such as group assignments. Therefore, ensuring high-quality
clustering models along with satisfying fairness constraints are important require-
ments. This chapter comprehensively surveys clustering models and their fairness
in EDS. We especially focus on investigating the fair clustering models applied in
educational activities. It is believed that these models are practical tools for ana-
lyzing students’ data and ensuring fairness in EDS.
Keywords: bias, fairness, clustering, educational datasets, machine learning
Abbreviations
ACC Clustering accuracy
AI Artificial Intelligence
AIED Artificial Intelligence in Education
ANOVA Analysis Of Variance
This is a preprint of the following chapter: Tai Le Quy, Gunnar Friege, Eirini Ntoutsi, A
review of clustering models in educational data science towards fairness-aware learning,
published in Educational Data Science: Essentials, Approaches, and Tendencies, edited by
Alejandro Peña-Ayala , 2023, Springer. The final authenticated version is available online
at: https://link.springer.com/book/9789819900251
2
ARI Adjusted Rand Index
BIRCH Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies
BMI Body Mass Index
BMU Best Matching Unit
CFSFDP-HD Clustering by Fast Search and Finding of Density Peaks via
Heat Diffusion
CHI Calinski–Harabasz index
CLARA Clustering in LARge Applications
CLARANS Clustering Large Applications based on RANdomized Search
CORE Computing Research and Education Association of Australasia
DBSCAN Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
DBI Davies–Bouldin Index
DBLP Database Systems and Logic Programming
DI Dunn Index
DP Dirichlet process
EDM Educational Data Mining
EDS Educational Data Science
EM Expectation–Maximization
EMT Ensemble Meta-based Tree
FCM Fuzzy c-means clustering
FIE Frontiers in Education
ICALT International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
ITS Intelligent Tutoring Systems
KPCA Kernel-based Principal Component Analysis
LA Learning Analytics
LD Learning Design
LMS Learning Management System
ML Machine Learning
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MOOC Massive Open Online Course
NMI Normalized mutual information
OPTICS Ordering Points To Identify the Clustering Structure
OULAD Open University Learning Analytics
PAM Partition around medoids
PISA Program for International Student Assessment
RQ Research question
SJR SCImago Journal & Country Rank
SOM Self-organizing maps
SSE Sum of Squared Error
SVM Support Vector Machine
3
1 Introduction
Fairness is a fundamental concept of education, whereby all students must have an
equal opportunity in study or be treated fairly regardless of, e.g., their household
income, assets, gender, race, or knowledge and domain-specific abilities. Fairness
in the education system is reflected in a wide range of education-related activities,
such as assessment and measurement (Dorans & Cook, 2016; Zlatkin-
Troitschanskaia et al., 2019), students’ group work and group assignment (Re-
zaeinia, Góez, & Guajardo, 2021; Miles & Klein, 1998; Ford & Morice, 2003),
graduate school admission (Song, 2018), predicting student performance (Xiao, Ji,
& Hu, 2021). One of the kernel demands for justice is education; therefore, having
a fair education system is crucial to achieving justice in society (Meyer, 2014).
In EDS, machine learning (ML) has been used in a wide variety of decision-
making and learning analytics (LA) and educational data mining tasks (Peña-
Ayala, 2014; Dutt, Ismail, & Herawan, 2017; Romero & Ventura, 2020; McFar-
land, Khanna, Domingue, & Pardos, 2021); for example, student dropout predic-
tion (Del Bonifro, Gabbrielli, Lisanti, & Zingaro, 2020; Kemper, Vorhoff, &
Wigger, 2020), education admission decisions (Song, 2018) or forecasting on-time
graduation of students (Livieris, Tampakas, Karacapilidis, & Pintelas, 2019; Hutt,
Gardner, Duckworth, & D’Mello, 2019). The results of these ML models are the
basis for building applications in EDS, such as student data analysis, learning sup-
port, and decision support systems. In fact, different ML-based decisions can be
made based on protected attributes (i.e., the attributes for which the model is likely
to exhibit bias), such as gender or race, leading to discrimination (Ntoutsi et al.,
2020). Hence, improving fairness w.r.t. protected attributes in the results of ML
models is imperative while maintaining the performance of the models. In other
words, ensuring fairness in ML models also contributes to equity in educational
systems.
Research on fairness-aware ML has been carried out in various domains such
as finance, education, healthcare, criminology and social issues (Mehrabi, Mor-
statter, Saxena, Lerman, & Galstyan, 2021; Le Quy et al., 2022). However, along
with the development of the EDS research community, there are more and more
studies on ensuring the fairness of ML models applied in education. These studies
mainly focus on supervised learning models on the students’ data (Gardner,
Brooks, & Baker, 2019; Riazy, Simbeck, & Schreck, 2020; Bayer, Hlosta, & Fer-
nandez, 2021). Recently, there have been several surveys on algorithmic bias and
fairness in education, in which the authors presented the theory of fairness and
summarized the classification and predictive methods (Baker & Hawn, 2021; Ki-
zilcec & Lee, 2022).
Clustering is a novel and important technique in EDS (McFarland et al., 2021)
and educational data mining (Dutt et al., 2017). The main operation of clustering
models is to cluster instances, i.e., students, into groups based on similarity
4
measures to discover unknown patterns in the educational data, such as under-
standing student achievement (S. Liu & d’Aquin, 2017), characterizing students’
learning behaviors (N. Zhang et al., 2017). However, there are few studies on fair-
ness in clustering models in education (Le Quy et al., 2021). Furthermore, an
overview of clustering models and their fairness applied in education is still miss-
ing. Hence, it is necessary to conduct a survey of the commonly used clustering
models in EDS problems and discuss the fairness of these clustering models.
Therefore, our survey is serving to fill such a gap in the extant research. We be-
lieve that our survey is useful as it explores and consolidates the technical details
of clustering algorithms and fairness constraints on the educational data. Hence, it
will help both educational scientists and computer scientists easily select the most
appropriate methods for their clustering tasks that require fairness, such as student
assessment and group assignment, and to promote this subfield of research within
EDS.
The review is organized around the following key research questions:
• 𝑅𝑄 . Why is clustering an important task for EDS? What clustering models
1
and for what purposes have been applied in EDS?
• 𝑅𝑄 . What is fairness in clustering? How to achieve fair clustering results?
2
How to define and achieve fairness in clustering in EDS?
• 𝑅𝑄 . How to evaluate the quality of (fair) clustering in EDS? How is experi-
3
mental evaluation (datasets, parameter setting, methods, quality measures,
etc.) performed? Are there benchmark datasets?
• 𝑅𝑄 . Beyond fairness, what are other issues/requirements to be considered for
4
clustering in EDS?
In the following subchapters, we will summarize the EDS topics/problems
where the clustering models have been used. We will present the most prevalent
used clustering models w.r.t. their abilities in Section 2. Next, in Section 3, we
will overview existing fair clustering models and consider their potential for EDS.
After that, we will discuss evaluation aspects from benchmark datasets for (fair)
clustering in EDS to evaluation measures in Section 4. Requirements for cluster-
ing and other aspects in EDS beyond fairness will be covered in Section 5. Finally,
Section 6 will conclude this survey with an outlook for future work.
2 Clustering models for EDS
In this section, we answer the research question 𝑅𝑄 regarding the role of cluster-
1
ing in EDS and its typical applications. We also overview the main clustering
methods used in EDS and discuss several aspects of practical importance beyond
the algorithm itself, like cluster model assumptions and complexity.
5
2.1 Methodology of the survey process
We perform the following procedure to address RQ. First, we search the relevant
1
works by a set of keywords in three well-known scientific databases (Google
Scholar1, DBLP2 and Scopus3) and select only quality studies on ranked venues;
second, we categorize and summarize the educational tasks related to clustering in
Sections 2.2 and outline the different clustering methods in Section 2.3.
In the first step, we identify the following relevant keywords: bias, fairness,
clustering, learning analytics, educational data mining, and educational datasets.
We define a set of synonyms and antonyms for each, as listed in Table 1. The
search queries are performed on Google Scholar and DBLP with all possible com-
binations of the different synonyms (antonyms) of the keywords. After identifying
the papers, we select only the published papers on ranked conferences (A*, A, B,
C) or journals (Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4) that are indexed by Scopus. We refer to the up-
dated databases, i.e., issued in 2021, of Computing Research and Education Asso-
ciation of Australasia (CORE)4 for conferences’ ranking and SCImago Journal &
Country Rank (SJR)5 for journals’ ranking. Because the related research of Dutt et
al. (2017) provided a systematic literature review on clustering algorithms and
their applicability and usability in EDM from 1983 to 2016, we consider 133 pub-
lications from 2017 to June 2022.
In the next step, we analyze metadata on the selected publications. Table 2 pro-
vides a brief regarding the number of publications on venues w.r.t. ranking. As
shown in Table 2, 29.3% (39 out of 133) of selected articles are published in lead-
ing conferences/journals, i.e., Q1/A*/A ranking. The papers are collected from 97
venues (47 conferences and 50 journals). The top 10 venues are listed in Table 3;
they account for 31.6% (42 out of 133) of the total selected papers. In addition, we
count the number of publications by year and visualize it in Fig. 1. There has been
a slight upward trend in the number of articles published in peer-reviewed journals
over the years.
1 https://scholar.google.com/
2 https://dblp.org/
3 https://www.scopus.com/
4 http://portal.core.edu.au/conf-ranks/
5 https://www.scimagojr.com/
6
Table 1 A set of keywords
Keywords Synonyms Antonyms
bias discrimination fair, unbiased
fairness equity, justice
clustering grouping
learning analytics
educational data mining
educational datasets
Table 2 Venue-based distributions of publications
Type of venues Q1/A/A* Q2/B Q3/C Q4/Other
Journal 25 18 7 13
Conference 14 21 5 30
Table 3 The top 10 venues
No Venues #Publications Ranking
1 Educational Data Mining (EDM) 11 B
2 Journal of Physics: Conference Series 7 Q4
3 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
5 A
Education (AIED)
4 IEEE Access 4 Q1
5 Education and Information Technologies 3 Q1
6 Scientific Programming 3 Q2
7 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) 3 C
8 Complexity 2 Q1
9 International Conference on Advanced Learning Tech-
2 B
nologies (ICALT)
10 International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
2 B
tems (ITS)
7
Fig. 1 Number of publications over the years (2022 is not yet complete).
2.2 EDS tasks using clustering models
Clustering has been used in a variety of tasks in EDS, from analyzing students’
behavior (Section 2.2.1) and performance (Section 2.2.2) to grade prediction (Sec-
tion 2.2.3), recommendations (Section 2.2.4), supporting collaboration and team-
work (Section 2.2.5) and analyzing students’ wellbeing (Section 2.2.6). Student
data are collected from various sources, including traditional classrooms and
learning management systems (LMS), such as Moodle6 or ITS.
2.2.1 Analyzing students’ behavior, interaction, engagement, motivation and
emotion
Clustering methods are used to discover the relationship between students’ behav-
iors and their learning performance (Fang et al., 2018; W. Chang et al., 2020; S.
Zhang et al., 2021; Varela et al., 2019; Mai et al., 2022). This allows teachers to
get a good overview of their students and manage them accordingly (Ding et al.,
2017). For example, Waspada et al. (2019) used 𝑘-means to cluster students’ be-
havior and discovered that the activity of working on online quizzes affects the fi-
nal scores. Students who participated more became more engaged in the course
and achieved higher grades (Esnashari, Gardner, & Watters, 2018). Jia et al. (2017)
clustered the behavioral records of reading tests in an online Chinese reading as-
sessment system to identify students’ reading abilities and testing strategies.
Howlin & Dziuban (2019) proposed a repeated fuzzy clustering algorithm for dis-
covering student behaviors or outliers. Students’ behavior might change over time
and therefore, it is necessary to investigate such changes and ensure an up-to-date
6 https://moodle.org/
8
clustering model. McBroom et al. (2020) applied a hierarchical clustering method
to detect the behavioral trends of students over time and produced clusters of stu-
dents’ behavior, which characterize exercises where many students give up. Shen
and Chi (2017) developed a temporal clustering framework to determine if a stu-
dent’s learning experience is “unprofitable” to offer a personal suggestion.
Since gamification is starting to play an increasingly important role in educa-
tion activities, Ruipérez-Valiente et al. (2017) analyzed the relationship between
students’ interactions and behaviors with the badge system, i.e., students earn
badges through their interaction with engineering problems and the learning pro-
cess. The results are considered as feedback or guidelines on how to provide ap-
propriate game-based tasks to students, which can help them improve their learn-
ing. The interactions of university students in an e-learning system are clustered
and analyzed by the hierarchical clustering algorithm and 𝑘-means algorithm in
order to discover the relationship between the final grades and the use of the mod-
ules (López et al., 2017). Besides, experiments were performed on several cluster-
ing methods to cluster students’ interactions and investigate the associations be-
tween students’ academic performance and social interactions (Mengoni et al.,
2018). The resulting clusters can help educators identify the special students and
improve their Learning Design (LD) process and the teaching materials that need
to be revised.
Using the expectation–maximization (EM) clustering algorithm, Orji and
Vassileva (2020) discovered that students’ engagement is a good indicator of aca-
demic performance. Therefore, categorizing and identifying students with low
levels of engagement are effective ways to help them improve their academic per-
formance (Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Roy et al., 2017; Güvenç & Çetin, 2018;
Oladipupo & Olugbara, 2019; Palani et al., 2021). Besides, different levels of en-
gagement are identified in students who use different learning strategies through
Pearson correlation analysis on clusters resulting from the agglomerative hierar-
chical clustering method (J. B. Huang et al., 2021). 𝑘-means algorithm was used to
cluster students based on 12 engagement metrics (Moubayed et al., 2020). The au-
thors discovered that the most representative of the students’ engagement levels
are the number of logins and the average duration to submit assignments.
Students’ motivation is essential in the massive open online course (MOOC)
environment (Hartnett, 2016). 𝑘-means was used to analyze the questionnaire re-
sults of the MOOC system (Nen-Fu et al., 2018) and discover the relationship be-
tween learning motivation and the learning behavior of the students. Besides, self-
motivation in college students was investigated by using 𝑘-means clustering to re-
veal the effect of a hidden curriculum and character-building variables. The exper-
iments were performed on the real dataset collected at the State University of Ma-
lang, Indonesia (Gunawan et al., 2018). In addition, teachers should also pay
attention to students’ emotions (Z. Wang & Wang, 2022) because there is a rela-
tionship between emotion and performance (Ashkanasy, 2004) as well as between
the emotions and motivation of the students (Muñoz-Merino et al., 2014). Students
9
can obtain many emotional experiences through physical education activities,
which improves learning interest and relationships among teachers and students
(H. Guo & Wang, 2022).
2.2.2 Analyzing students’ performance and grading
Learning analytics (LA) is an important research area of EDS, which focuses on
the collection and analysis of data about learners. In LA, students are often divid-
ed into groups based on their performance, which allows the educators to identify
low-performing students and help them accordingly (Salwana et al., 2017; Vo &
Nguyen, 2018; Thilagaraj & Sengottaiyan, 2020), whereas for high-performing
students, enrichment tasks can be assigned to help them advance further. Moreo-
ver, analyzing student learning outcomes is one of the most effective methods for
understanding the factors affecting students’ learning ability (Bharara et al., 2018;
Yin, 2021). For example, procrastination is an important indicator of students’
performance, with non-procrastinators tending to have higher performance (Park
et al., 2018; Hooshyar et al., 2019). Using 𝑘-means, experimental results show that
the academic performance of female students is affected by nutrition and health is-
sues (Preetha, 2021). In this direction, k-means clustering model was used to dis-
cover the factors contributing to students’ performance Aghababyan et al. (2018),
resulting in interpretable clusters of students based on their confidence entropy7,
degree of over/under confidence and other related variables.
A clustering model not only can help teachers analyze students’ assignments,
but it is also an effective method to support essay grading. For instance, interpret-
able clustering has been used to cluster and find the structure of students’ solu-
tions in a Python programming course (Effenberger & Pelánek, 2021). With a sim-
ilar purpose to automatically cluster programming assignments (C programming),
𝑘-means was applied in the study of Gao et al. (2019). Besides, L.-H. Chang et al.
(2021) proposed a clustering method to cluster sentences to support grading the
essays written in Finnish by bachelor students. In addition, Sobral and de Oliveira
(2021) used 𝑘-means to observe the change in self-assessment skills between two
evaluation moments (after submitting their work/test and after knowing the correct
answers) to investigate the role of self-evaluation in the student’s final grade.
2.2.3 Predicting students’ performance
Student performance prediction (including test scores, students at-risk, dropout, etc.
prediction) is a common task in EDS (Khan & Ghosh, 2021). Various EDS tech-
niques, such as correlation, regression, and classification, have been applied to
7 Students’ confidence entropy is computed by the Shannon equation.
10
predict students’ performance (Romero & Ventura, 2017). By using clustering
models, studies have tried to achieve various objectives, which can be grouped
broadly into three categories: 1) Predicting the performance of students in terms of the
actual grade as a regression problem; 2) Considering student performance predic-
tion as a classification problem; 3) Predicting student at-risk or dropout.
To predict students’ grades, clustering has been used as a pre-processing step
to detect groups/clusters of similarly performing students before applying the pre-
dictive models. For example, 𝑘-means was used to reveal the unique types of stu-
dents labeled as “proficient”, “struggling”, “learning”, and “gaming” (Adjei et al.,
2017), which was helpful in predicting standardized test scores. Besides, Bayesian
fuzzy clustering was used to cluster students into groups (Ramanathan et al.,
2019), and then the Kernel-based principal component analysis (KPCA) was ap-
plied to identify the best features from the data, which is used in the prediction
phase with a Lion-Wolf deep belief network model. Recently, Hassan et al. (2022)
applied 𝑘-means to group students in terms of both static attributes like sleep,
stress, study spaces and spatio-temporal attributes like latitude, longitude, time be-
fore transferring these clusters to several well-known regression models for grade
prediction.
Casalino et al. (2019) proposed an adaptive fuzzy clustering algorithm to pro-
cess the educational data as data streams to predict student outcomes (pass, fail).
They cluster non-overlapping chunks of data and then investigate cluster proto-
types to classify students into two classes (pass, fail). In addition, an Ensemble
Meta-based Tree (EMT) model was introduced to classify students into four cate-
gories (excellent, very good, good, and satisfactory) (Almasri et al., 2020). In their
architecture, 𝑘-means was used to find a set of homogeneous clusters before ap-
plying a classifier model for each cluster. Concerning predicting student enroll-
ment in postgraduate studies, 𝑘-means was applied to reveal the presence of three
coherent clusters of students (Iatrellis et al., 2021). In another approach, Francis
and Babu (2019) classified students into three groups (high, medium, low) by us-
ing four popular classifiers (SVM, Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, and Neural net-
work). After that, 𝑘-mean clustering and majority voting are used to predict the
best accuracy of students. In the MOOC environment, Y.-W. Chu et al. (2021)
used clustering-guided meta-learning-based to exploit clusters of frequent patterns
in the students’ click-stream sequences in order to predict students’ in-video quiz
performance.
Many studies predict student dropout and at-risk by applying clustering meth-
ods because student dropout is the primary concern of many educational institutes
(Khan & Ghosh, 2021), especially in MOOCs. A soft subspace clustering algo-
rithm has been applied to discover the interesting patterns and relationships with
student dropout rates (Iam-On & Boongoen, 2017a). A link-based cluster ensem-
ble was proposed to transform the data into a new form before applying some
classification models (Iam-On & Boongoen, 2017b) to improve the performance
of student dropout prediction. 𝑘-means was used to discover the students likely to
11
drop out of school (Purba et al., 2018). Regarding student at-risk prediction, a
time-series clustering (Hung et al., 2017) was applied to capture the at-risk stu-
dents. Besides, a clustering ensemble method on temporal educational data com-
bining dynamic topic modeling and kernel 𝑘-means was introduced to predict ear-
ly students in-trouble (Nguyen & Vo, 2019).
2.2.4 Supporting learning, providing feedback and recommendation
Hierarchical clustering was applied to group students with similar learning styles
in the classroom to support teachers in understanding the cognitive skills of stu-
dents and selecting appropriate teaching methods for each group(Yotaman et al.,
2020). Besides, grouping students based on their knowledge patterns is a common
strategy to allow lecturers to monitor students’ performance easily and provide
suitable learning materials to each group (Khayi & Rus, 2019; Qoiriah et al., 2020;
Silva & Silla, 2020). In addition, in the tutoring process, the appropriate assign-
ment of students - teachers contributes to improving students’ learning quality.
Hence, (Urbina Nájera et al. (2017) proposed a clustering model based on 𝑘-
means to cluster students and teachers according to their skills and affinities. Fur-
thermore, an online annotation and clustering system has been developed to allow
lecturers to generate students’ online reading activity patterns and review their an-
notations (M.-H. Chang et al., 2017).
In terms of generating automatic feedback for students answering a well-being
survey, Kylvaja et al. (2019) applied hierarchical clustering to identify the typical
patterns in the well-being profiles. The automatic feedback was generated by
searching the best matching cluster for an individual survey response. With the
aim of providing feedback on psychological fitness, Y. Li and Sun (2022) applied
the fuzzy c-means algorithm to analyze the university students’ psychological fit-
ness data by extracting the characteristics of students’ rebellious psychological
phenomenon, e.g., talking during class and continually using profanity. Besides, in
programming education, researchers suggested that feedback on students’ assign-
ments can be generated based on program repair techniques (Gulwani et al.,
2018). The authors proposed an automated program repair algorithm for a funda-
mental programming course. They built a clustering algorithm to divide similar
correct solutions into a group and applied the existing correct solutions to repair
the new incorrect assignments. In addition, concerning students’ feedback for aca-
demic courses, Masala et al. (2021) applied 𝑘-means on local contexts (where the
keywords occurred) centered on specific keywords to find similar students’ opin-
ions.
As the requirement of developing a course recommendation method to satisfy
students’ personal goals and interests in MOOC, Y. Guo et al. (2022) proposed a
group-oriented course recommendation approach. They used a semantic 𝑘-means
clustering algorithm to group students before applying a course recommendation
12
algorithm based on similarity and expert knowledge to generate the final recom-
mended courses. Following another approach, hierarchical clustering was used to
divide students into different types, and a collaborative filtering AI algorithm was
utilized for lesson recommendations (M. Wang & Lv, 2022). Furthermore, H. Liu
et al. (2019) introduced an incremental tensor-based adaptive clustering method
based on correlative analysis and personalized recommendation to offer students
appropriate learning resources in various contexts.
2.2.5 Supporting collaboration activities
Teamwork is a popular activity in educational settings and is an essential factor in
improving students’ engagement in the classroom (Fasanya & Fathizadeh, 2019).
Clustering methods have been applied to group learners in traditional classrooms
and MOOC systems. In the traditional classroom, students are grouped into ho-
mogeneous and heterogeneous groups based on their knowledge levels to capture
rich semantic information about the group (Wu et al., 2021). They apply a spectral
clustering algorithm for dividing students into groups with a group size of no more
than eight. Besides, Pratiwi et al. (2017) proposed their clustering method to au-
tomatically generate heterogeneous groups based on students’ dissimilarity. The
resulting clusters are comparable with the teachers’ manual grouping solutions. In
addition, 𝑘-means is applied to produce the training groups for American football
student-athletes based on their roles and expected performance during the compe-
tition (Shelly et al., 2020).
In MOOC systems, the problem of grouping students w.r.t. preferences and in-
terests was introduced by (Akbar et al., 2018). They introduced a grouping method
based on hierarchical 𝑘-means clustering and a weighting formula (the priority of
topic preferences) to satisfy students’ interests and to ensure that students are
grouped in a team with similar preferences. Furthermore, Y. Wang and Wang
(2022) developed their clustering technique based on the enhanced particle swarm
optimization algorithm to group students w.r.t. their knowledge state and interests.
2.2.6 Analyzing physical and mental health
Health and well-being are determined by an individual’s physical condition and
the potential to contribute to society (Yang, 2021). In their study, 𝑘-means was
used to cluster and analyze the physical quality of college students based on their
characteristics (body mass index, vital capacity, endurance quality, flexibility
strength quality, and speed dexterity quality). From there, colleges and universities
could optimize their education and teaching plans and perfect their talent training
programs by using the study’s results. In other aspects, a variety of clustering
methods (𝑘-means, hierarchical clustering, BIRCH, etc.) were applied to identify
13
several types of students based on fitness scores and BMI (fit, not-fit, overweight-
and-fit, normal-weight-and-non-fit) (Dovgan et al., 2019). Besides, since nutrition
may affect both students’ physical health and well-being, an exploratory analysis
was performed to understand university students’ foot habits by using 𝑘-means
(Natilli et al., 2018).
In terms of mental health analysis, psychological fitness was analyzed by using
fuzzy 𝑐-means (Y. Li & Sun, 2022). Besides, a fast-clustering method was used to
analyze college students’ mental health data (Y. Chu & Yin, 2021). As a result,
the findings from these studies may support school counselors and student manag-
ers in providing better mental health services for students. In addition, Y. Li et al.
(2021) explained the relationship between mental health and career planning and
examined how mental health education and career planning are integrated for col-
lege students using fuzzy feature clustering.
2.2.7 Miscellaneous tasks
Differentiated institutions and diversity are key policy issues in higher education
(C. Wang & Zha, 2018). Hence, C. Wang and Zha (2018) introduced three differ-
ent methods to measure diversity in higher education: 1) using existing institution-
al classifications to measure systemic diversity; 2) measuring systemic diversity
based on detecting optimal types of institutions (𝑘-means and k-medians were ap-
plied to obtain the institutional types from the higher education institutions data);
3) taking into consideration both within-group homogeneity and between-group
heterogeneity when measuring systemic diversity. Experimental results based on
data from Chinese universities in 1998 and 2011 showed that the operations and
profiles of Chinese universities have become more diverse.
The common assumption of similarity-based clustering methods is that students
should perform similarly on items that belong to the same knowledge component
(Nazaretsky et al., 2019). Therefore, the authors proposed a new item-similarity
measure, namely Kappa Learning. As students progress through the items, their
mastery of the skills underlying each item changes, and this measure indicates
similarity between items. The experimental results on the K-6 Math intelligent tu-
toring system showed that the new measure outperforms clustering based on popu-
lar similarity measures. In clustering, feature selection plays an essential role be-
cause it strongly affects the clustering quality (L. Huang et al., 2019). They
developed an efficient algorithm to select the most important features using an en-
tropy-based feature selection method. Their proposed method was evaluated on an
online course at Guangxi Radio & TV University and showed its effectiveness in
choosing good quality features and contribution to the interpretability of the re-
sulting clusters.
Furthermore, concerning implementing an intelligent educational administra-
tion system, F. Liu (2021) introduced a student achievement prediction model
14
based on fuzzy c-means and collaborative filtering. The problem of grouping lead-
ership variables in non-formal education has been investigated in the research of
Rahmat (2017) using hierarchical clustering. Towards the expansion of personali-
zation in online learning environments, Ahmed et al. (2021) used 𝑘-means to clus-
ter students into similar groups based on their skills. In addition, grouping students
can also be based on their learning style (Pamungkas et al., 2021). The DBSCAN
algorithm can be used to analyze the learning status of students, which influences
teaching activities (Du et al., 2021).
2.3 Clustering models
We identify the clustering models in the literature and record publications using
the clustering algorithms in Table 8 (in Appendix). There are 23 clustering meth-
ods applied for EDS tasks. 𝑘- means is the most prevalent approach, followed by
hierarchical and fuzzy 𝑐-means clustering. The distribution of the clustering algo-
rithms across observed publications is illustrated in Fig. 2. Based on the popularity
of the methods, we overview the algorithms used in at least three publications.
Fig. 2 Clustering models applied in EDS
The goal of a clustering model is to group objects, e.g., students, into clusters
where the objects in the same cluster are similar and the objects in different clus-
15
ters are different. We denote 𝒟 ={𝑥 ,𝑥 ,…,𝑥 } be a dataset of 𝑛 objects8 in 𝑑-
1 2 𝑛
dimensional space, and 𝑘 is the number of clusters. We list the symbols used in
our review in Table 4. In the following sections, we present eight popular cluster-
ing models used in EDS.
Table 4 Symbols and their descriptions
Symbol Description
𝒟 Dataset 𝒟 ={𝑥 ,𝑥 ,…,𝑥 }
1 2 𝑛
𝒞 A clustering 𝒞 ={𝐶 ,𝐶 ,…,𝐶 }
1 2 𝑘
𝑛 The number of data points
𝑑 The number of attributes (dimensions)
𝑘 The number of cluster centers (centroids, medoids)
𝑆 A set of cluster centers 𝑆 ={𝑠 ,𝑠 ,…,𝑠 }
1 2 𝑘
𝑥 or 𝑥 A data point
𝑖
𝐶 A cluster
𝑗
𝑠 or 𝑠 A cluster center (centroid, medoid)
𝑗
𝑡 The number of iterations
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (,) A distance function
ℒ(𝒞,𝒟) An objective function of clustering 𝒞 on dataset 𝒟
2.3.1 𝒌-means
𝑘-means (MacQueen, 1965) is the most popular partitioning-based clustering
method that aims to partition 𝑛 objects into 𝑘 clusters. The number of clusters 𝑘 is
given in advance. A clustering 𝒞 is a partition of dataset 𝒟 into 𝑘 disjoint subsets,
𝒞 ={𝐶 ,𝐶 ,…,𝐶 }, called clusters with 𝑆 ={𝑠 ,𝑠 ,…,𝑠 } be the corresponding
1 2 𝑘 1 2 𝑘
cluster centers (centroids). The centroid of each cluster is computed by the mean
of the cluster’s members. Formally, the goal is to minimize the clustering cost:
𝑘
ℒ(𝒞,𝒟)=∑∑𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠)2. (1)
𝑖
𝑖=1𝑥∈𝐶𝑖
where function 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠) returns the distance from any point 𝑥 ∈𝐶 to the cen-
𝑖 𝑖
troid 𝑠 of cluster 𝐶.
𝑖 𝑖
Algorithm: Lloyds’s version (Lloyd, 1982) is the most prevalent implementa-
tion of 𝑘-mean algorithm, described below:
1. Randomly choose 𝑘 points as initial centroids {𝑠 ,𝑠 ,…,𝑠 }.
1 2 𝑘
2. Assign each point in 𝒟 to its closest centroid.
3. Update the center of each cluster based on the new point assignments.
8 Because the objects or data points for clustering in the related work are mainly students, we
use the terms “objects”, “data points” and “students” interchangeably.
16
4. Repeat until convergence.
In this chapter, there are several variant versions of 𝑘-means used in the related
work, including 𝑘-medians (Jain & Dubes, 1988) (the median of points in a cluster
is used to compute its centroid) and 𝑥-means (replicate partitions and separates the
best results until a certain threshold is reached) (Pelleg et al., 2000).
Complexity: The computational complexity of 𝑘-means is 𝒪(𝑡𝑘𝑛), where 𝑡 is
the number of iterations needed until convergence, and usually 𝑘,𝑡 ≪𝑛.
2.3.2 𝒌-medoids
𝑘-medoids clustering is introduced by Kaufman and Rousseeuw (1990) with the
partition around medoids (PAM) algorithm. Similar to 𝑘-means, the goal of 𝑘-
medoids is to minimize the clustering cost (Eq.1). However, 𝑘-medoids select the
actual data points as cluster centers (namely medoids).
Algorithm: The PAM algorithm uses a greedy search strategy, which is pre-
sented below:
1. Arbitrarily select 𝑘 data points as the medoids.
2. Assign each data point to the closest medoid.
3. While the clustering cost decreases:
a. For each medoid 𝑠, and for each non-medoid 𝑥:
i. Check whether 𝑥 could replace 𝑠, and compute the cost change.
ii. If the cost change is the current best, remember (𝑠, 𝑥) combination.
b. Perform the best 𝑠𝑤𝑎𝑝(𝑠 ,𝑥 ) if it decreases the clustering cost, else
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
terminate the algorithm.
Complexity: The computation complexity of the original PAM algorithm per
iteration (step 3) is 𝒪(𝑘(𝑛−𝑘)2). The complexity can be reduced to 𝒪(𝑛2) with
several improved algorithms (CLARA, CLARANS) (Schubert & Rousseeuw,
2021). In which, the CLARANS algorithm was evaluated in the study of Vasuki
and Revathy (2022) to predict the degree of student achievement in placement.
2.3.3 Hierarchical clustering
Hierarchical clustering is a set of nested clusters organized as a hierarchical tree
that can be visualized as a dendrogram (Patel et al., 2015). There are two main
types: Agglomerative (bottom-up approach) and Divisive (top-down approach).
Hierarchical agglomerative clustering is applied in the related work. BIRCH (T.
Zhang et al., 1996) - a version of hierarchical agglomerative clustering which is
suitable for very large databases, is used by Dovgan et al. (2019) for their analysis.
This section presents the basic hierarchical agglomerative clustering method
(Kaufman & Rousseeuw, 1990). There are many approaches for computing the
17
proximity of two clusters (linkage algorithms): single linkage, complete linkage,
average linkage, centroid-distance, Ward’s method (Ward Jr, 1963), etc.
Algorithm:
1. Compute the proximity matrix.
2. Each data point is considered as a cluster.
3. Repeat
a. Merge two closest clusters.
b. Update the proximity matrix.
Until only a single cluster
Complexity: The time complexity of the basic agglomerative algorithm is
𝒪(𝑛3). The complexity can be reduced to 𝒪(𝑛2log𝑛) by using the heap data struc-
ture.
2.3.4 Fuzzy 𝒄-means clustering
Fuzzy 𝑐-means clustering (FCM) (Dunn, 1973) is a soft clustering approach where
each data point can belong to more than one cluster. Each data point is assigned a
weight (membership grade) indicating the degree to which the data point belongs
to the cluster. We denote a matrix 𝑊 ={𝑤 }∈[0,1], where 𝑤 referring to the
𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑗
degree to which data point 𝑥 belongs to cluster 𝐶, 𝑖 =1,…,𝑛; 𝑗=1,…,𝑘. The
𝑖 𝑗
goal of the FCM algorithm is to minimize the following objective function:
𝑛 𝑘
ℒ(𝒞,𝒟)=∑∑𝑤𝑚𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠) 2 (2)
𝑖𝑗 𝑖 𝑗
𝑖=1𝑗=1
Where:
1
𝑤𝑚 =
𝑖𝑗 2
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠) 𝑚−1 (3)
∑𝑘 ( 𝑖 𝑗 )
ℎ=1 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥 ,𝑠 )
𝑖 ℎ
𝑚 is the fuzzy parameter indicating the degree of fuzziness, 𝑚 ∈(1,+∞). The
centroid 𝑠 of cluster 𝐶 is computed by:
𝑗 𝑗
∑𝑛 𝑤𝑚𝑥
𝑖=1 𝑖𝑗 𝑖
𝑠 = (4)
𝑗 ∑𝑛 𝑤𝑚
𝑖=1 𝑖𝑗
Algorithm:
1. Select the number of clusters 𝑘.
2. Assign weights randomly for data points
3. Repeat
a. For each cluster, compute its new centroid.
b. For each data point, compute its new weight.
Until convergence (the weights’ change between two iterations is no more than
a given 𝜖).
18
Complexity: The time complexity of fuzzy 𝑐-means is similar to 𝑘-means, i.e.,
𝒪(𝑡𝑘𝑛), where 𝑡 is the number of iterations (P. Zhang & Shen, 2018).
2.3.5 EM clustering
EM is a soft clustering approach to finding the maximum likelihood estimates of
parameters in probabilistic models (Dempster et al., 1977). There are two im-
portant steps: expectation (𝐸) and maximization (𝑀). EM uses the finite Gaussian
mixtures model to estimate parameters until convergence. Each cluster corre-
sponds to one of 𝑘 probability distributions in the mixture. Similar to fuzzy 𝑐-
means clustering, each data point is assigned a membership probability for each
cluster (Jin & Han, 2010). The EM algorithm is summarized as follows:
Algorithm:
1. Initialize with two randomly placed Gaussians (mean and standard devia-
tion).
2. Refine the parameters iteratively with two alternating steps until conver-
gence:
a. 𝐸 step: re-estimate the membership possibility for each instance based on
the current model
b. 𝑀 step: re-estimate the model parameters based on the new membership
possibilities.
3. Assign data points to the cluster with their membership probability.
In the 𝐸 step, the membership possibility for each instance 𝑥 w.r.t. cluster 𝐶
𝑖 𝑗
(Tan et al., 2016) is computed by:
𝑃(𝑥|𝐶)𝑃(𝐶)
𝑖 𝑗 𝑗
𝑃(𝐶|𝑥 )= (5)
𝑗 𝑖 ∑𝑘𝑃(𝑥|𝐶)𝑃(𝐶)
𝑗 𝑖 𝑗 𝑗
where 𝑃(𝑥 |𝐶) is the probability density function of the Gaussian distribution.
𝑖 𝑗
In the 𝑀 step, the probability of data points coming from the cluster 𝐶 (cluster
𝑗
density) is determined by:
𝑛
1
𝑃(𝐶)= ∑𝑃(𝐶|𝑥 ) (6)
𝑗 𝑁 𝑗 𝑖
𝑖=1
Update centroid 𝑠 for each cluster 𝐶:
𝑗 𝑗
∑𝑛 𝑥 𝑃(𝐶|𝑥)
𝑖=1 𝑖 𝑗 𝑖
𝑠 = (7)
𝑗 ∑𝑛 𝑃(𝐶|𝑥)
𝑖=1 𝑗 𝑖
and cluster covariances (distance computations) are determined as:
∑𝑛 (𝑥 −𝑠)(𝑥 −𝑠) ′ 𝑃(𝐶|𝑥 )
𝑖=1 𝑖 𝑗 𝑖 𝑗 𝑗 𝑖
Σ =
𝑗 ∑𝑛 𝑃(𝐶|𝑥 ) (8)
𝑖=1 𝑗 𝑖
19
Complexity: In the EM algorithm, for each iteration, distance computations re-
quire 𝒪(𝑛𝑘). Hence, the distance computation takes 𝒪(𝑑3) where 𝑑 is the dimen-
sion. Therefore, in general, the time complexity of the EM algorithm for each iter-
ation is 𝒪(𝑛𝑘𝑑3).
2.3.6 SOM clustering
Self-organizing maps (SOM) (Kohonen, 1982) is a center-based clustering
scheme. The idea of SOM clustering is for each data point 𝑥 ∈𝒟,𝑖 =1…𝑛 we
𝑖
aim to represent x with 𝑑-dimensions through an output space with two dimen-
i
sions. SOM clustering creates a two dimensions output space where each node in
the output space is associated with a “weight” vector. The weight vector contains
the position of the node in the input space (dataset), and the weight vectors will
move toward the input data when the best matching unit (BMU) is found based on
the Euclidean distance from the observed data point to all weight vectors. The
summary of the SOM clustering algorithm is described as follows (Bação et al.,
2005):
Algorithm: Apart from symbols described in Table 4, let 𝑊 be a grid of 𝑚
nodes, 𝑤 (𝑢 and 𝑣 are their coordinates of the grid); 𝑡 be the iteration; α(𝑡)∈
𝑢𝑣
[0,1] be the learning rate factor; 𝑟(𝑡) be the radius of the neighborhood function
ℎ(𝑤 ,𝑤 ,𝑡); α(𝑡) and 𝑟(𝑡) decrease monotonically over time. The Gaussian is
𝑢𝑣 𝑚𝑖𝑛
a commonly used neighborhood function (Natita et al., 2016):
ℎ(𝑤 ,𝑤 ,𝑡)=α(𝑡)𝑒 (− 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑤 2𝑟 𝑚 ( 𝑖 𝑡 𝑛 ) , 2 𝑤𝑢𝑣)2 ) (9)
𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑢𝑣
1. Initialize the weight vectors of nodes in the output space randomly.
2. Repeat
a. For each data point 𝑥:
𝑖
i. For all 𝑤 ∈𝑊 calculate d v=dist(x −w v)
𝑢𝑣 u i u
ii. Select the node that minimizes d as w
uv min
iii. Update node 𝑤 ∈𝑊: 𝑤 =𝑤 +αℎ(𝑤 ,𝑤 ,𝑡)𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑤 )
𝑢𝑣 𝑢𝑣 𝑢𝑣 𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑢𝑣 𝑖 𝑢𝑣
b. Increase 𝑡
Until the number of iterations 𝑡 is reached.
Complexity: The computation complexity of the SOM clustering is 𝒪(𝑛𝑚𝑑𝑡),
where 𝑛 is the number of data points in the dataset 𝒟, 𝑚 is the number of nodes of
the output space, d is the dimension of each data point, and 𝑡 is the number of iter-
ations (Melka & Mariage, 2017).
2.3.7 Spectral clustering
In spectral clustering (Shi & Malik, 2000; Ng et al., 2001), the spectrum (eigen-
values) of the similarity matrix of the data is used to reduce dimensionality before
20
clustering in fewer dimensions. A similarity matrix is provided as the input and
represents quantitative measurements of the similarity between two points. We
summarize a well-known version of the spectral clustering proposed by Ng et al.
(2001) as follows:
Algorithm: Given a dataset 𝒟 ={𝑥 ,𝑥 ,…,𝑥 } and 𝑘 is the number of clus-
1 2 𝑛
ters.
2
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
(− )
2𝜎2
1. Create the similarity matrix 𝐴∈ℝ𝑛×𝑛 where 𝐴 =𝑒 if 𝑖 ≠𝑗,
𝑖𝑗
else 𝐴 =0. The scaling parameter 𝜎2 is used to decide how quickly 𝐴 falls off
𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑗
with the distance between 𝑥 and 𝑥.
𝑖 𝑗
2. Create the diagonal matrix 𝐺 with 𝐺 is the sum of column 𝑖 of matrix 𝐴.
𝑖𝑖
Define the Laplacian 𝐿=𝐺−1/2𝐴𝐺−1/2.
3. Find 𝑘 largest eigenvectors of 𝐿, denoted as 𝑢 ,𝑢 ,…,𝑢 . They should be
1 2 𝑛
orthogonal in the case of repeated eigenvalues. Then, we create the matrix 𝑈 =
[𝑢 𝑢 …𝑢 ]∈ℝ𝑛×𝑘 by columnarizing the eigenvectors.
1 2 𝑘
4. Renormalize each row of 𝑈 to have unit length to create matrix 𝑉, where
𝑉 =
𝑈𝑖𝑗
.
𝑖𝑗
√∑𝑗𝑈
𝑖
2
𝑗
5. Consider each row of matrix 𝑉 as a point in ℝ𝑘 and use 𝑘-means (or any oth-
er clustering methods) to cluster them into 𝑘 clusters.
6. If and only row 𝑖 of the matrix 𝑉 is assigned to cluster 𝑗, we assign the origi-
nal point 𝑥 to cluster 𝑗.
𝑖
Complexity: In comparison with other clustering methods, spectral clustering
has a high computational complexity of 𝒪(𝑛3) in general. Therefore, spectral clus-
tering is not suitable for large datasets (D. Yan et al., 2009).
2.3.8 DBSCAN clustering
DBSCAN is a density-based clustering that discovers the clusters and the noise in
a spatial database (Ester et al., 1996). There are two parameters: Eps (the maxi-
mum radius of the neighborhood) and MinPts (the minimum number of points in
an 𝐸𝑝𝑠-neighborhood of that point. In DBSCAN clustering, the points are catego-
rized as core points (points inside of the cluster), border points (points on the bor-
der of the cluster) and outliers.
• A point 𝑝 is a core point if at least 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 points are within distance 𝐸𝑝𝑠 of
𝑝 (including 𝑝), i.e.,| 𝑁 (𝑝)={𝑞 | 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑝,𝑞) ≤𝐸𝑝𝑠} |≥𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠.
𝐸𝑠𝑝
• A point 𝑞 is the border point if it has fewer than 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 points within 𝐸𝑝𝑠
radius, but it is in the neighborhood of a core point.
• 𝑂𝑢𝑡𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑠 are any points that cannot be reached from any other point.
• A point 𝑝 is directly density-reachable from point 𝑞 w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if 𝑝∈
𝑁 (𝑞) and 𝑞 is a core point.
𝐸𝑝𝑠
21
• A point 𝑝 is density-reachable from a point 𝑞 w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if there is a
chain of points 𝑝 ,…,𝑝 , where 𝑝 =𝑞,𝑝 =𝑝, such that 𝑝 is directly
1 𝑛 1 𝑛 𝑖+1
density-reachable from 𝑝.
𝑖
• A point 𝑝 is density-connected to a point 𝑞 w.r.t. Eps, MinPts if there is a
point 𝑜 such that both 𝑝 and 𝑞 are density-reachable from 𝑜 w.r.t. Eps,
MinPts.
A cluster is a maximal set of density-connected points. Based on the above nota-
tions, the DBSCAN clustering can be summarized as follows:
Algorithm:
1. Start at a random point 𝑝.
• 2. Find all points density-reachable from 𝑝 w.r.t. Eps, MinPts.
3. If 𝑝 is a core point, form a cluster starting with 𝑝 and expand the cluster
through neighbors of 𝑝.
4. If 𝑝 is a border point, and no point is density-reachable from 𝑝, DBSCAN
visits the next point of the dataset.
5. Repeat the process until all points are processed.
Complexity: In general, 𝒪(𝑛×time to find points in the Eps−
neighborhood) is the runtime complexity. In the worst case, it is 𝒪(𝑛2). The av-
erage time complexity can be reduced to 𝒪(𝑛log𝑛) by using an efficient data
structure (e.g., kd-trees).
3 Fair clustering models (for EDS)
In this section, we find the answer to the research question 𝑅𝑄 by summarizing
2
the popular fairness notions for clustering and well-known fair clustering models
and investigating the applicability of those models in EDS.
3.1 Fairness notions
In general, the fairness notions depend on the application and specific context.
There are 20 fairness notions used for fair clustering summarized in a survey of
fairness in clustering (Chhabra et al., 2021). In their review, the fairness notions
are categorized into four types: group-level, individual-level, algorithm agnostic,
and algorithm specific. Based on the popularity of the fairness notions9 (Chhabra
9 We only take into account the fairness notions introduced in the published papers. Because
the fairness notions may be turned into measures, therefore, in this review we use the term “fairness
notion” and “fairness measure” interchangeably.
22
et al., 2021), we summarize the following four notions: balance, bounded repre-
sentation, social fairness, and individual fairness.
In the next sections, we denote 𝒢 as the protected attribute with two values
{𝐹,𝑀}, e.g., gender = {female, male}. In which, 𝐹 is the discriminated group (or
protected group), e.g., “female”, and 𝑀 is the non-discriminated group (or non-
protected group), e.g., “male”. Besides, we continue using the symbols listed in
Table 4.
3.1.1 Balance
Balance is the most popular group-level fairness notion used in studies in fair
clustering, which was introduced by Chierichetti et al. (2017). Given a clustering
𝒞 ={𝐶 ,𝐶 ,…,𝐶 } with 𝑘 clusters, the balance of a cluster 𝐶 is the minimum ra-
1 2 𝑘 𝑖
tio between the number of objects in the protected group and the non-protected
group. The balance of a clustering is the minimum balance score of all clusters. If
each cluster has a balance of at least 𝜃 as defined by the balance requirement 𝜃,
then clustering is fair. The balance measure can be applied in any fair clustering
model.
#𝐹 ∈𝐶 #𝑀 ∈𝐶
𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝐶)=𝑚𝑖𝑛( 𝑖 , 𝑖 ) (10)
𝑖 #𝑀 ∈𝐶 #𝐹 ∈𝐶
𝑖 𝑖
𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝒞)=𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑘 (𝐶) (11)
𝑖=1 𝑖
3.1.2 Bounded representation
Bounded representation is a generalization of disparate impact and was introduced
by Ahmadian et al. (2019). This group-level notion aims to reduce imbalances in
cluster representations of protected attributes (for example, gender). Let 𝛼 be the
over-representation parameter; a cluster 𝐶 is fair if the fractional representation of
𝑖
each group (protected, non-protected group) in the cluster is at most 𝛼.
|{𝑥 ∈𝐶|𝒢 =𝑔}|
𝑖
≤𝛼,where𝑔 ∈𝐹,𝑀 (12)
|𝐶|
𝑖
Then, a clustering 𝒞 is fair if all clusters satisfy the representation constraint.
Similar to the balance notion, all fair clustering models can apply the bounded
representation measure. Besides, bounded representation is generalized with two
parameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 in the study of Bera et al. (2019), where for each value of the
protected attribute, the fractional representation of it in the cluster must be be-
tween 𝛽 and 𝛼.
3.1.3 Social fairness
23
Social fairness was first introduced by Ghadiri et al. (2021), which aims to pro-
vide equitable costs for different clusters. In the 𝑘-means algorithm, the target is to
minimize the objective function (recall Eq. 1).
𝑘
ℒ(𝒞,𝒟)=∑∑𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠)2
𝑖
𝑖=1𝑥∈𝐶𝑖
We denote 𝒟 and 𝒟 are two subsets of dataset 𝒟, which contain values 𝐹
𝐹 𝑀
and 𝑀 of the protected attribute, respectively; 𝒟 =𝒟 ∪𝒟 . Then, the fair 𝑘-
𝐹 𝑀
means objective is the larger average cost (social fairness cost):
ℒ(𝒞,𝒟 ) ℒ(𝒞,𝒟 )
Φ(𝒞,𝒟)=𝑚𝑎𝑥{ 𝐹 , 𝑀 } (13)
∣𝒟 ∣ ∣𝒟 ∣
𝐹 𝑀
The goal of the fair 𝑘-means is to minimize the social fairness cost Φ(𝒞,𝒟). A
disadvantage of this measure is that it can only be applied to center-based cluster-
ing because it is modeled on the objective function of a particular algorithm
(Chhabra et al., 2021).
3.1.4 Individual fairness
Chakrabarti et al. (2022) introduced two individual-level fairness notions for 𝑘-
center clustering, namely Per-Point Fairness and Aggregate Fairness. Given a da-
taset 𝒟, the goal is to choose a set 𝑆⊆𝒟 of at most 𝑘 centers and then find an as-
signment λ:𝒟 ↦𝑆. We denote α≥1 is a parameter. For all data points 𝑥 ∈𝒟,
ℐ ⊆𝒟 is denoted as the group of data points that are similar to 𝑥. The fairness
𝓍
notions are described as follows:
Per-Point Fairness: For all data points 𝑥 ∈𝒟, Per-Point Fairness is satisfied
if the distance from 𝑥 to its center is at most 𝛼 time the distance of the closest point
in that cluster to the center λ(x).
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,λ(𝑥))≤α𝑚𝑖𝑛 {𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑦,λ(𝑦))} (14)
𝑦∈ℐ𝓍
Aggregate Fairness: For all data points 𝑥 ∈𝒟, Aggregate Fairness is satisfied
if the distance from 𝑥 to its center is at most 𝛼 time the average distance of the
points in that cluster to the center 𝜆(𝑥).
∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑦,𝜆(𝑦))
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,λ(𝑥))≤α 𝑦∈ℐ𝓍 (15)
|ℐ |
𝓍
24
3.2 Fair clustering models
In this section, we overview the fair clustering models based on their popularity of
the corresponding traditional clustering models. We hypothesize that if a cluster-
ing model is widely used in the education setting, its corresponding fair model will
also be more applicable. Therefore, we focus on center-based clustering (such as
𝑘-means, 𝑘-center, 𝑘-medoids), hierarchical clustering, and spectral clustering.
3.2.1 Fair center-based clustering
Fair 𝑘-center clustering. The first work on group-level fair clustering was intro-
duced by Chierichetti et al. (2017) to ensure an equal representation of each pro-
tected attribute in every cluster. They defined a new fairness notion, balance, de-
scribed in Section 3.1.1. A two-phase approach was proposed: 1) Fairlet
decomposition - clustering all instances into fairlets which are small clusters guar-
antying fairness constraint; 2) Applying vanilla clustering methods (𝑘-center, 𝑘-
median) on those fairlets to obtain the final resulting fair clusters. Fig. 3 illustrates
the fair clustering method using the fairlets concept.
Fig. 3 Fair clustering through fairlets.
Besides, Ahmadian et al. (2019) introduced a new fairness measure (bounded rep-
resentation) by providing an upper bound constraint for fairness in resulting clus-
ters, applied for 𝑘-center clustering. Jones et al. (2020) proposed an algorithm
with a linear time complexity and obtained a 3-approximation for the fair 𝑘-center
summaries problem. Recently, Chakrabarti et al. (2022) presented two individual
fairness notions that guarantee each data point has a similar quality of service.
They proposed approximation algorithms for the 𝑘-center objective.
Fair 𝑘-means clustering. Schmidt et al. (2019) proposed a fair 𝑘-means clus-
tering by using the coresets concept. Essentially, a coreset is a summary of a point
25
set that approximates any possible solution’s cost function well. They extended
the approach of Chierichetti et al. (2017) to compute the fairlet for 𝑘-means algo-
rithm. Their experiments show that the new method can be applied to big data.
Besides, Ghadiri et al. (2021) introduced the social fairness notion, which focuses
on minimizing the clustering cost across groups of the protected attribute. They
proposed a fair clustering version of the well-known Lloyd 𝑘-means and reported
results through clustering cost. Abraham et al. (2020) introduced a fair 𝑘-mean
clustering model, namely FairKM, which combines the optimization of the classi-
cal clustering objective and a novel fairness loss term. Their model aims to
achieve a trade-off between clustering quality (on the non-protected attributes) and
cluster fairness (on the multiple protected attributes).
Fair 𝑘-medoids clustering. 𝑘-medoids clustering and fairlet decomposition
were applied in the study of Le Quy et al. (2021). They introduced the grouping
problem in the educational setting, where each cluster has a limitation in terms of
cardinality, and the clustering must be fair w.r.t. protected attribute. They applied
the fairlet decomposition (Chierichetti et al., 2017) to obtain the fairness w.r.t.
protected attribute, and 𝑘-medoids clustering was used to satisfy the cardinality
constraint. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work taking into account
fairness and clustering in the educational environment.
Fair fuzzy 𝑐-means clustering. A fair fuzzy 𝑐-means clustering was proposed
by Xia et al. (2021). Their goals are to minimize the objective function ℒ(𝒞,𝒟)
(Eq. 2), and maximize the ratio of each group (e.g., female, male), i.e., as close as
possible to the ratio in the original dataset. They defined a new fair loss function
to measure the fair loss in clusters and optimized the assignment phase according
to the objective function to obtain a fair clustering.
3.2.2 Fair hierarchical clustering
Ahmadian et al. (2020) defined a fair hierarchical clustering for any fairness con-
straint, in which “a hierarchical clustering is fair if all of its clusters (besides the
leaves) are fair”. They extended the fairlet decomposition (Chierichetti et al.,
2017) for upper-bounded representation fairness and proved the results for the
revenue, value, and cost objectives. In the educational domain, Le Quy et al.
(2021) proposed a fair-capacitated clustering and used hierarchical clustering to
obtain the clusters with a given maximum capacity, while the fairness constraint
was satisfied by using the fairlet decomposition approach.
3.2.3 Fair spectral clustering
Kleindessner et al. (2019) incorporated the balance fairness notion in normalized
and unnormalized constrained spectral clustering. They applied 𝑘-means cluster-
26
ing on a fair subspace generated by projecting the graph Laplacian. As mentioned
in Section 2.3.7, spectral clustering is used widely in educational data analysis.
Therefore, the fair version of this model is a potential candidate for EDS.
4 (Fair) clustering evaluation in EDS
In this section, we investigate the evaluation aspects of clustering models toward
fairness, including evaluation measures, datasets and parameter selection to tackle
the research question 𝑅𝑄 .
3
4.1 Evaluation measures
4.1.1 Clustering quality measures
Table 5 outlines the measures used in related work to evaluate the cluster validity.
We summarize the most prevalent measures as follows:
Silhouette coefficient. This is a metric that measures cluster separation and
compactness at the same time for both individual data points, as well as clusters
and clustering. The silhouette score of a data point 𝑥 in cluster 𝐶 is computed by:
𝑖 𝐼
β −α
𝑖 𝑖
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (16)
𝑖 𝑚𝑎𝑥(α ,β )
𝑖 𝑖
and 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 =0 if∣𝐶 ∣=1.
𝑖 𝐼
In Eq. 16, 𝛼 is the average distance of the data point 𝑥 to other points in its
𝑖 𝑖
cluster 𝐶, i.e., α =
∑𝑗≠𝑖,𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝐼 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗)
, and β is the minimum of the average dis-
𝐼 𝑖 ∣𝐶𝐼∣−1 𝑖
tance of the point 𝑥 to points in other clusters, β =
𝑖 𝑖
1
𝑚𝑖𝑛 ∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑥). Finally, the silhouette coefficient of the entire da-
𝐽≠𝐼∣𝐶𝐽∣ 𝑥𝑗∈𝐶𝐽 𝑖 𝑗
taset is the maximum value of the mean 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 over all data points (Kaufman &
𝑖
Rousseeuw, 1990).
Sum of Squared Error (SSE) or cluster cohesion. SSE measures how closely
related objects are in a cluster, which is computed by objective function:
𝑘
𝑆𝑆𝐸 =∑∑𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑥,𝑠)2 (17)
𝑖
𝑖=1𝑥∈𝐶𝑖
where 𝑘 is the number of clusters, and 𝑠 is the centroid of the cluster 𝐶.
𝑖 𝑖
27
Davies–Bouldin index (DBI) is an internal evaluation scheme introduced by
Davies and Bouldin (1979). DBI is calculated by the following formula:
𝑘
1 σ +σ
𝑖 𝑗
𝐷𝐵𝐼 = ∑𝑚𝑎𝑥 ( ) (18)
𝑘 𝑗≠𝑖 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑠,𝑠)
𝑖=1 𝑖 𝑗
where 𝑘 is the number of clusters, 𝑠 is the centroid of cluster 𝑖-th, σ is the av-
𝑖 𝑖
erage distance of all cluster members in cluster 𝑖 to its centroid 𝑠.
𝑖
Dunn index (DI) was introduced by Dunn (1974), which identifies clusters that
are well-separated and dense. DI is computed by dividing the minimal inter-cluster
distance by the maximal intra-cluster distance.
𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑖,𝑗)
1≤𝑖<𝑗≤𝑘
𝐷𝐼 = (19)
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡′(𝑝)
1≤𝑝≤𝑘
where 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑖,𝑗) is the distance between clusters 𝑖-th and 𝑗-th (e.g., the distance
between two centroids), and 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡′(𝑝) is the intra-cluster distance of cluster 𝑝 (e.g.,
the maximal distance between any pair of data points in cluster 𝑝).
Table 5 Clustering quality measures
Measures Used in
Battaglia et al. (2017); Bharara et al. (2018);
Fang et al. (2018); Khayi and Rus (2019);
Howlin and Dziuban (2019); Abraham et al.
(2020); Maylawati et al. (2020); Moubayed et
Silhouette coefficient al. (2020); Šarić-Grgić et al. (2020); Ahmed et
al. (2021); X. Li et al. (2021); Palani et al.
(2021); Xia et al. (2021); T. Zhang et al.
(2022); Talebinamvar and Zarrabi (2022); Has-
san et al. (2022).
Kurniawan et al. (2018); Schmidt et al. (2019);
Rijati et al. (2018); Abraham et al. (2020); W.
Sum of Squared Error (SSE) Chang et al. (2020); Le Quy et al. (2021); Xia
et al. (2021); Yin (2021); Sobral and de
Oliveira (2021).
W. Chang et al. (2020); X. Li et al. (2021);
Davies–Bouldin index (DBI) Ahmed et al. (2021); Palani et al. (2021); Del-
gado et al. (2021).
Calinski–Harabasz index C. Wang & Zha (2018); W. Chang et al.
(CHI) (2020); X. Li et al. (2021); Palani et al. (2021).
Shen and Chi (2017); Aghababyan et al.
ANOVA test
(2018).
Dunn index (DI) Fang et al. (2018); Ahmed et al. (2021).
Normalized mutual infor- Vo and Nguyen (2018); Q. Tang et al. (2021).
mation (NMI)
28
Measures Used in
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) Mishler and Nugent (2018).
Chi-Square Wu et al. (2021).
Clustering accuracy (ACC) Q. Tang et al. (2021).
Fuzzy silhouette index Howlin and Dziuban (2019).
Heterogeneity score Wu et al. (2021).
Homogeneity score Wu et al. (2021).
Log-likelihood Wu et al. (2021).
Modified partition coefficient Howlin and Dziuban (2019).
Partition coefficient Howlin and Dziuban (2019).
Partition entropy Howlin and Dziuban (2019).
Simpson index C. Wang and Zha (2018).
t-tests Mojarad et al. (2018).
Xie and Beni index Howlin and Dziuban (2019).
4.1.2 Fairness measures for fair clustering
Balance is the most prevalent fairness measure used in the fair clustering models
(Chierichetti et al., 2017; Kleindessner et al., 2019; Schmidt et al., 2019; Le Quy
et al., 2021). Xia et al. (2021) reported the clustering results in terms of fairness by
the following measures: balance (Bera et al., 2019), Euclidean distance of distri-
bution vectors and Wasserstein distance of distribution vectors. Abraham et al.
(2020) used the following fairness measure to evaluate their model: Average Eu-
clidean, Average Wasserstein, Max Euclidean, Max Wasserstein. Besides,
Chakrabarti et al. (2022) reported their experimental results on two fairness
measures: Per-Point Fairness and Aggregate Fairness. In terms of clustering cost,
Ghadiri et al. (2021) presented their result on social fairness, which is the cluster-
ing cost of each group of the protected attribute. In addition, the bounded represen-
tation measure was used to report the resulting clustering for fair hierarchical clus-
tering (Ahmadian et al., 2020).
4.2 Datasets
In the related work, most datasets are non-public. The data are collected by the
paper’s authors or shared within their institute. Therefore, accessing educational
datasets is a significant challenge. This section summarizes the educational da-
tasets used in the references w.r.t. (fair) clustering. Due to the capacity of the book
chapter, we only list the datasets used in the top journals and conferences, i.e.,
ranking Q1, A*/A. In Table 6, we outline 27 non-public educational datasets used
29
in the related work. Besides, seven public educational datasets are summarized in
Table 7. The datasets are sorted in ascending order of the paper’s publication year.
The majority of the datasets are tabular and collected in MOOCs and e-learning
platforms. Most of the datasets are small, and only seven datasets contain more
than 10,000 instances.
Table 6 Non-public datasets used to evaluate (fair) clustering models.
Protected
Dataset & Description Used in Data source Data type
attributes
427,382 logs in the time period
of 16 weeks and 546,966 cleaned Online
Hung et al. Ethnicity,
logs in 18 courses on Moodle learning Tabular
(2017) gender
online graduate program in the platform
United States
Course “Social Aspects of In-
formation Technology” in the
Khalil and
iMooX platform with 459 ma- Gender MOOC Tabular
Ebner (2017)
triculated under-graduates and
379 external students
811 records covering the ad-
mission years of 2007–2009 at Iam-On et al. Gender Traditional Tabular
Mae Fah Luang University (2017a) classroom
1,199 university students and
Urbina Náje- Gender,
35 teachers (277 students and 19 Traditional
ra et al. marital Tabular
teachers are selected for experi- classroom
(2017) status
ments)
MITx introductory programming
Gulwani et
course with 12,973 correct and - MOOC Text
al. (2018)
4,293 incorrect attempts
1,093 students in two e- Online
tutorials: SOWISO and MyS- Tempelaar et Gender learning Tabular
tatLab (MSL) in 2016/2017 al. (2018)
platform
Synthetic dataset of 600 students Kausar et al.
- Synthetic Tabular
(2018)
438 and 617 Chinese public uni-
C. Wang et Traditional
versities in 1998 and 2011, re- - Tabular
al. (2018) classroom
spectively
64 students in projects in a
Akbar et al.
graduate software engineering - MOOC Tabular
(2018)
course
10 million meals were con-
sumed by about 82,871 students Natilli et al. Canteen of
Gender Tabular
at the canteen of the University (2018) university
of Pisa
Real student dataset of various
academic disciplines of higher Francis et al. Traditional
Gender Tabular
educational institutions in Kera- (2019) classroom
la, India
30
Protected
Dataset & Description Used in Data source Data type
attributes
Three groups of learners (size
30, 50, 80) in Hubei province of H. Liu et al. Traditional
- Tabular
China (National Training Plan (2019) classroom
2015)
486 students attending under-
Online
graduate science courses at the Moubayed et
- learning Tabular
University of Western Ontario al. (2020)
in Canada platform
102 middle school students in S. Li et al. Traditional
the Northeastern United States (2020) Race classroom Tabular
1,062 students from Balqa Ap-
plied University (BAU) in Jor- Almasri et Gender Traditional Tabular
dan from 2006 to 2018 al. (2020) classroom
2,000 students from 4 universi- W. Chang et Traditional
Gender Tabular
ties in China al. (2020) classroom
Two online Python program-
Online
mingcourses: intermediate McBroom et
- learning Tabular
(42,131 students) and beginners al. (2020)
platform
(7,164 student) in Australia
9,024 undergraduates at a uni-
versity in Beijing during the X. Li et al. - Traditional Tabular
spring of 2019 (2021) classroom
180 students Traditional
Yin (2021) Gender Tabular
classroom
1,709,189 records of online stu-
Online
dents enrolled from 2015 to Delgado et
- learning Tabular
2019 at Universidad Internac- al. (2021)
platform
ional de La Rioja (UNIR)
8,201 feedback responses for
168 distinct courses from the Masala et al.
- Survey Text
University Politehnica of Bucha- (2021)
rest in 2019–2020
121 students in programming di-
dactic course at Stockholm Uni- Wu et al. - Traditional Text
versity in 2020 (2021) classroom
Programming course in online
learning environment, training: Online
Effenberger
11 problems (2,358 solutions), - learning Text
et al. (2021)
test: 11 new problems (2,598 so- platform
lutions)
Two datasets: 29 students from
the international relations course
Sobral et al. Traditional
and 50 students from the com- Gender Tabular
(2021) classroom
puter science and computer en-
gineering courses
251 students’ click-stream log Online
data in an introductory physics T. Zhang et - learning Text
course (Fall 2020 semester) al. (2022) platform
180 male and 458 female Iranian Tale- Online
B.A. students involving 20 clas- binamvar et Gender learning Tabular
ses at Mazandaran University of al. (2022) platform
31
Protected
Dataset & Description Used in Data source Data type
attributes
Science and Technology
400 first-year students in a Medi-
Online
um sized Metropolitan University Mai et al.
- learning Tabular
in Dublin with two programming (2022)
platform
courses
Table 7 Public datasets used to evaluate (fair) clustering models.
Protected
Dataset & Description Used in Data source Data type
attributes
Dataset of shell commands 10
Online
with18 cybersecurity training Švábensky` et
- learning Text
sessions, 8,834 commands col- al. (2022)
platform
lected from 113 trainees
480 students collected by Kal- Online
board 360 LMS (xAPI- Edu- Bharara et al. Gender learning Tabular
Data11) (2018) platform
OULAD dataset12 with 32,593 Casalino et
students enrolled in 7 courses at al. (2019); Le
Online
Open university in England Quy et al.
Gender learning Tabular
(2021);
platform
Palani et al.
(2021)
Student performance dataset13 of Jones et al.
two Portuguese secondary (2020); Le Traditional
Gender Tabular
schools Quy et al. classroom
(2021)
PISA test scores dataset14 with
information of 5,233 American
students in 2009 from the Pro- Le Quy et al. Gender Traditional Tabular
gram for International Student (2021) classroom
Assessment (PISA)
MOOC dataset15 of 416,921 stu-
dents in the MOOCs enrolled in
the 16 edX courses offered by Le Quy et al. Gender MOOC Tabular
Harvard and MIT during 2012- (2021)
2013
10 https://gitlab.ics.muni.cz/muni-kypo-trainings/datasets/commands
11 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/aljarah/xAPI-Edu-Data
12 https://analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open_dataset
13 https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/student+performance
14 https://www.kaggle.com/econdata/pisa-test-scores
15 https://github.com/kanika-narang/MOOC_Data_Analysis
32
Protected
Dataset & Description Used in Data source Data type
attributes
StudentLife dataset16 Hassan et al. Online
(2022) - learning Tabular
platform
4.3 Parameter selection
4.3.1 Center-based clustering
𝑘-means clustering. To choose the best value for the number of clusters 𝑘, re-
searchers run the clustering with several values for 𝑘 and select the one that does
not result in a significant improvement in the compactness of the cluster at any
further increase in 𝑘 (Natilli et al., 2018). In the study of Yang (2021), 𝑘 was de-
termined based on the experimental analysis of the real application of clustering
results for students’ development, optimizing education and teaching. In another
approach, researchers determined the optimal 𝑘 based on 10-fold cross-validation
implemented on the training set (Adjei et al., 2017). Besides, the silhouette coeffi-
cient is also used as an essential criterion to select the best number of clusters
(Bharara et al., 2018; Moubayed et al., 2020; X. Li et al., 2021; Hassan et al.,
2022). The pre-implemented package, namely NbClust17 is also used to find the
optimal 𝑘 (Khalil & Ebner, 2017; Oladipupo & Olugbara, 2019). In addition, T.
Zhang et al. (2017) proposed a method to select the initial center points by parti-
tioning the dataset into 𝑘 domains and choosing the points with the greatest densi-
ty in each domain as the initial cluster centers. Aghababyan et al. (2018), Naza-
retsky et al. (2019) and Ahmed et al. (2021) applied within the SSE between data
points in clusters to select the number of clusters. In the fair 𝑘-means version,
Schmidt et al. (2019) experimented their proposed method with the number of
clusters in a range [20, 100], and Ghadiri et al. (2021) used the range [4,16] for 𝑘.
𝑘-medoids clustering. Regarding 𝑘-medoids clustering, the Euclidean distance
is usually used as the dissimilarity measure (Furr, 2019), and the number of me-
doids 𝑘 is determined by using the average silhouette coefficient (Kausar et al.,
2018; Furr, 2019). In the study of Le Quy et al. (2021) with the fair-capacitated 𝑘-
medoids model, the number of clusters is experimented with in a range of [3, 20].
𝑘-cencer fair clustering. Chakrabarti et al. (2022) performed experiments with
the number of clusters 𝑘 in {2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. A set of 𝑘 in {3, 4, 6, 8, 10,
12, 14, 16, 18, 20} was selected for experiments in the work of Chierichetti et al.
(2017). However, the optimal value of 𝑘 was not discussed in their studies.
16 https://studentlife.cs.dartmouth.edu/dataset.html
17 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/NbClust/index.html
33
4.3.2 Hierarchical clustering
In the related work, Euclidean distance is a similar common dissimilarity measure
(Kylvaja et al., 2019; S. Li et al., 2020; Yotaman et al., 2020; T. Zhang et al.,
2022). Yotaman et al. (2020) used Manhattan distance and several linkage algo-
rithms: average link, complete linkage, single linkage, Ward’s linkage, and medi-
an linkage in their experiments. However, Ward’s linkage is the popular linkage
applied for proximity matrix computation (Shen & Chi, 2017; Kylvaja et al., 2019;
S. Li et al., 2020; T. Zhang et al., 2022). The number of clusters is chosen by us-
ing the local maximum average (T. Zhang et al., 2022) or based on the meaning of
the resulting clusters (Kylvaja et al., 2019). In other approaches, the gap statistics
(comparing total intra-cluster variation against expected values under distributions
exhibiting no obvious clustering patterns) are applied to evaluate the resulting
clusters and determine the number of clusters (S. Li et al., 2020). The knee posi-
tion, which is described by the local change of slope of the SSE significantly, is
applied to identify the number of clusters (Shen & Chi, 2017; Yotaman et al.,
2020). Le Quy et al. (2021) varied the number of clusters between 3 and 20 to ex-
periment with their fair-capacitated hierarchical clustering model.
4.3.3 Fuzzy 𝒄-means clustering
The parameters are set by a heuristic strategy, with a threshold 𝜖 = 10𝑒-5 (Q. Tang
et al., 2021). Usually, the fuzzy parameter is set at 𝑚 = 2 (Howlin & Dziuban,
2019; Amalia et al., 2019; Q. Tang et al., 2021). Besides, the number of clusters is
set in a range, and the optimal 𝑘 is determined by using the gap statistics method
(Palani et al., 2021) or based on the variation trend of the error of the predictive
model (F. Liu, 2021). Howlin and Dziuban (2019) used validity indices imple-
mented in FClust18 R package to select the optimal 𝑘. In addition, Oladipupo and
Olugbara (2019) applied NbClust package to find the number of clusters. In the
fair fuzzy 𝑐-means clustering, the number of clusters 𝑘 was chosen in {4, 6, 8}
(Xia et al., 2021).
4.3.4 EM clustering
T. Zhang et al. (2022) used the R package mixsmsn19 to execute the EM clustering
(with fitting finite mixtures of uni- and multivariate scale mixtures of skew-
normal distributions) for the categorization of events. A probabilistic mixture
model with Pois- son distribution within the EM algorithm is applied to cluster
18 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/fclust/index.html
19 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/mixsmsn/index.html
34
students’ procrastination behavior (Park et al., 2018). They used the Bayesian ap-
proach and Gamma prior distributions for the rate parameters to fit the mixture
model with two clusters (𝑘 = 2) on the student’s dataset. In addition, the Log-
likelihood measure and Schwarz’s Bayesian criterion are used for EM clustering
in the study of Ruipérez-Valiente et al. (2017), with the number of clusters set at 𝑘
= 3 based on cluster quality regarding cohesion and separation. With an assump-
tion that the resulting clusters of students should not exceed 20 members, Urbina
Nájera et al. (2017) applied the EM to divide students into 𝑘 = 14 groups. Preetha
(2021) set the number of clusters at 𝑘 = 4 to group students based on their perfor-
mance. Moreover, NbClust pre-implemented package is also used to determine the
number of clusters (Oladipupo & Olugbara, 2019).
4.3.5 SOM clustering
To determine the number of nodes of the output space, Delgado et al. (2021)
trained different SOM models with a different number of nodes and selected the
one with the lowest value of the topographic function (the average number of left-
over neighborhood connections per output node). Besides, the number of clusters
is chosen by using the connectivity indices Conn_Index (Tasdemir & Merényi,
2011) and DBI methods. The quality of clustering is evaluated by silhouette coef-
ficient, DBI and DI measures (Alias, Ahmad, & Hasan, 2017). In addition, the
number of nodes could be chosen as 𝑚= 3√𝑛 or equal to the number of clusters
(Bara, Ahmad, Modu, & Ali, 2018). Ahmad et al. (2019) set the number of nodes
𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑚)
as 𝑚 =5√𝑛 and the neighborhood radius 𝑟 = after training 10 times.
4
4.3.6 Spectral clustering
𝑛
In the related work, the cluster size is determined by √ (Wu et al., 2021). Be-
2
sides, the Elbow method is used to find the optimal number of clusters (Hooshyar
et al., 2019) by comparing the distortion score with 𝑘 in a range of [2,4].
Kleindessner et al. (2019) performed the experiments with the number of clusters
ranging from 2 to 8 and 1 to 15 for two datasets.
4.3.7 DBSCAN clustering
A heuristic method is used to find the optimal 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 (X. Li et al., 2021) by us-
ing the graphs w.r.t. different 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠, where the graph is the visualization of a
function mapping each sample in the dataset to the distance from its 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠-th
35
nearest neighbor. Optimal 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 is determined by selecting a minimum value
whose 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠-dist graph exhibits no significant difference from the rest. As a result,
a maximal 𝐸 𝑝𝑠 can be obtained by finding the 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠-dist value of the sample in
the first “valley” in the graph of optimal 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠. In the other work (Kausar et al.,
2018), the 𝑘-nearest neighbor distances (the average distance of every data point to
its 𝑘-nearest neighbors) in a matrix of data points are applied to determine the op-
timal value of 𝐸𝑝𝑠 and 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 parameters. In the study of Du et al. (2021), they
computed the 𝑘-distance of each data point and then sorted these distances in as-
cending order before visualizing them in a scatter chart. 𝐸𝑝𝑠 value is decided by
the value of 𝑘-distance corresponding to the position that changes sharply. The pa-
rameter 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑡𝑠 is chosen based on the minimum number of students with higher
similarity in the class.
5 Beyond fairness requirements for clustering in EDS
In this section, we investigate other problems and needs apart from fairness for
clustering in EDS to tackle the research question 𝑅𝑄 .
4
Cardinality constraints. In collaborative learning, it is important to have
comparable group sizes to distribute work fairly. However, many traditional and
fair clustering models do not consider the cardinality of the resulting clusters. As a
result, clustering models may produce groups of students of various sizes, which
makes it difficult for teachers to assign work to groups. Therefore, clustering
models need to ensure fairness and consider the resulting clusters’ size to increase
the usefulness and actionability of the clustering. The capacity constraint can be
expressed as the minimum size, the maximum size of the clusters, or both (Mul-
vey & Beck, 1984; Bradley et al., 2000). Recently, the fair-capacitated clustering
problem was introduced by Le Quy et al. (2021), which ensures fairness and bal-
anced cardinalities of the resulting clusters. They proposed two solutions to
achieve the capacitated clustering on the top of fairlet decomposition, namely hi-
erarchical-based and 𝑘-medoid-based approaches.
Explainability. Explaining decisions is becoming increasingly important in
education, especially in ML-based learning systems. ML algorithms, e.g., cluster-
ing models, are black boxes for decision-makers. However, because clustering al-
gorithms rely on all data features, they produce cluster assignments that are diffi-
cult to explain. Hence, a fairly obvious requirement is that clustering models
should provide explanations for the model’s results, i.e., cluster assignments, in a
way that humans can understand. Several studies are focusing on the explainabil-
ity of well-known clustering models, such as 𝑘-means, 𝑘-medians (Moshkovitz et
al., 2020), sby using a small decision tree. Bandyapadhyay et al. (2022) investi-
gated the computational complexity of several variants of explainable clustering
and introduced a new model of explainable clustering by a threshold tree after re-
36
moving a subset of points. As mentioned above, fair clustering models aim to find
the trade-off between the clustering quality and fairness in resulting clusters.
Therefore, the goal of explainable models is to provide an explanation for these
fair clustering models in terms of both cluster quality and fairness.
Homogeneous and heterogeneous clustering. In educational settings, both
homogeneous and heterogeneous groups play an essential role. Typically, the ob-
jective of clustering models is to divide objects into homogeneous clusters, for ex-
ample, students with the same ability level. Hence, homogeneous groups are the
base for providing adequate support in a learning situation and allowing ability-
specific learning. Besides, in collaborative learning, the heterogeneous groups
w.r.t. characteristics and level of ability of students are more important to prevent
critical group building (winners and looser, the smart students and the other) or to
allow learning in teams with different specific abilities (Watson & Marshall, 1995;
D.-Y. Wang et al., 2007; Pratiwi et al., 2017). In this way, collaborative learning
can benefit from psychological factors in heterogeneous groups. Therefore, clus-
tering algorithms need to consider the specific EDS task to determine whether the
algorithm’s output is homogeneous or heterogeneous clusters.
6 Conclusions and Outlook
Clustering techniques play a crucial role in analyzing students’ performance, sup-
porting learning, giving feedback and recommendation, and many EDS tasks.
Studies on clustering algorithms and fairness in EDS can employ a variety of ap-
proaches and discussions.
First, in this chapter, we summarize the popular EDS tasks using clustering
techniques and present the most prevalent clustering algorithms (traditional and
fairness-aware models). We also discuss evaluation aspects w.r.t. clustering per-
formance, datasets and fairness measures. In which, improving clustering perfor-
mance is an essential requirement of the clustering models because the clustering
quality is the objective of any clustering algorithm. Hence, by increasing cluster-
ing quality, the clustering models are also more likely to find meaningful clusters,
which are useful for cluster analysis. In addition, fair clustering models also need
to take into account the trade-off between clustering quality and the fairness of the
resulting clusters.
Second, because EDS has grown rapidly due to the emergence of both novel
data and innovative methods (McFarland et al., 2021), it is crucial to collect and
develop a benchmark educational dataset for EDS. On the one hand, the vast ma-
jority of datasets are non-public and challenging to access due to their privacy is-
sues, as demonstrated in our review. On the other hand, they are collected for dif-
ferent analytical purposes or problems. Therefore, the scope of use of these
datasets is somewhat limited. Besides, generating the synthetic dataset for EDS is
37
a potential solution to overcome the difficulties caused by the lack of benchmark
educational datasets (Flanagan et al., 2022; Vie et al., 2022).
Third, with the rapid development of MOOC systems, researchers can collect
and process large volumes of data in various formats, both structured and unstruc-
tured. Therefore, traditional clustering and corresponding fairness-aware models
also need to be improved and upgraded to be able to handle such big educational
data. For example, (fair) clustering methods should be scalable with big data
(Fahad et al., 2014; Backurs et al., 2019) or be able to process high-dimensional
data (Assent, 2012).
Forth, bias and discrimination are common problems in education. In this chap-
ter, we study the well-known fairness measures applied in clustering models in
various domains. However, because fairness notions differ across disciplines, it
isn’t easy to evaluate the efficiency of fairness-aware clustering algorithms.
Therefore, selecting or defining the appropriate fairness notions for the education-
al domain is crucial and necessary. There are several studies on evaluation fairness
for classification algorithms in education (Gardner et al., 2019; Le Quy et al.,
2022a). However, choosing the appropriate fairness measures for fair clustering
models in EDS is still a significant challenge for researchers.
Fifth, because clustering models are widely applied in many EDS tasks, and
each problem has different constraints or requirements, constrained clustering
models are also applied. For example, the recommendation systems take into ac-
count students’ preferences or clustering models that support collaborative learn-
ing concern the groups’ size. Moreover, the explainability and interpretability of
(fair) clustering models are also interesting topics for future research.
To conclude, the construction and selection of clustering models (traditional or
fair) in EDS is an important issue in improving the efficiency of educational data
analysis and contributing to improving current educational systems. We overview
the role of (fair) clustering models in EDS and investigate the use of existing clus-
tering models in EDS. We believe that our survey can help both educational scien-
tists and computer scientists have a broad picture of clustering models and fairness
in education, then they can determine the appropriate clustering methods for their
studies.
Acknowledgments. The work of the first author is supported by the Ministry of Science and
Culture of Lower Saxony, Germany, within the Ph.D. program “LernMINT: Data-assisted teach-
ing in the MINT subjects”.
References
Abraham, S. S., Padmanabhan, D., & Sundaram, S. S. (2020). Fairness in clustering with multiple
sensitive attributes. In EDBT/ICDT 2020 Joint Conference (pp. 287–298). doi:
http://doi.org/10.5441/002/edbt.2020.26
38
Adjei, S., Ostrow, K., Erickson, E., & Heffernan, N. T. (2017). Clustering students in assistments:
exploring system-and school-level traits to advance personalization. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM) (pp. 340–341).
Aghababyan, A., Lewkow, N., & Baker, R. S. (2018). Enhancing the clustering of student performance
using the variation in confidence. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (pp. 274–279). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91464-0_27
Ahmad, N. B., Alias, U. F., Mohamad, N., & Yusof, N. (2019). Principal component analysis and self-
organizing map clustering for student browsing behaviour analysis. Procedia Computer Science,
163, 550–559. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.12.137
Ahmadian, S., Epasto, A., Knittel, M., Kumar, R., Mahdian, M., Moseley, B., . . . Wang, Y. (2020).
Fair hierarchical clustering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 21050–
21060.
Ahmadian, S., Epasto, A., Kumar, R., & Mahdian, M. (2019). Clustering without over-representation.
In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD) (pp. 267–275). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330987
Ahmed, A., Zualkernan, I., & Elghazaly, H. (2021). Unsupervised clustering of skills for an online
learning platform. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Learning
Technologies (ICALT) (pp. 200–202). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT52272.2021.00066
Akbar, S., Gehringer, E., & Hu, Z. (2018). Poster: Improving formation of student teams: A clustering
approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 40th International Conference on Software
Engineering: Companion (ICSE-Companion) (pp. 147–148).
Alias, U. F., Ahmad, N. B., & Hasan, S. (2017). Mining of e-learning behavior using SOM clustering.
In Proceedings of the 6th ICT International Student Project Conference (ICT-ISPC) (pp. 1–4). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICT-ISPC.2017.8075350
Almasri, A., Alkhawaldeh, R. S., & Çelebi, E. (2020). Clustering-based EMT model for predicting
student performance. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 45(12), 10067–10078. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-020-04578-4
Amalia, N., et al. (2019). Determination system of single tuition group using a combination of fuzzy c-
means clustering and simple additive weighting methods. In IOP Conference Series: Materials
Science and Engineering (Vol. 536, p. 012148). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-
899X/536/1/012148
Ashkanasy, N. M. (2004). Emotion and performance. Human performance, 17(2), 137–144. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327043hup1702_1
Assent, I. (2012). Clustering high dimensional data. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 2(4), 340–350. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1062
Bação, F., Lobo, V., & Painho, M. (2005). Self-organizing maps as substitutes for k-means clustering.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science (pp. 476–483). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/11428862_65
Backurs, A., Indyk, P., Onak, K., Schieber, B., Vakilian, A., & Wagner, T. (2019). Scalable fair
clustering. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (pp. 405–
413).
Baker, R. S., & Hawn, A. (2021). Algorithmic bias in education. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 1–41. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-021-00285-9
Bandyapadhyay, S., Fomin, F., Golovach, P. A., Lochet, W., Purohit, N., & Simonov, K. (2022). How
to find a good explanation for clustering? In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (Vol. 36, pp. 3904–3912).
Bara, M. W., Ahmad, N. B., Modu, M. M., & Ali, H. A. (2018). Self- organizing map clustering
method for the analysis of e-learning activities. In Majan International Conference (MIC) (pp. 1–
5). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/MINTC.2018.8363155
Battaglia, O. R., Di Paola, B., & Fazio, C. (2017). K-means clustering to study how student reasoning
lines can be modified by a learning activity based on feynman’s unifying approach. Eurasia
39
Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 13(6), 2005–2038. doi:
https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2017.01211a
Bayer, V., Hlosta, M., & Fernandez, M. (2021). Learning analytics and fairness: Do existing
algorithms serve everyone equally? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED) (pp. 71–75). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78270-2_12
Bera, S., Chakrabarty, D., Flores, N., & Negahbani, M. (2019). Fair algorithms for clustering. In
Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Conference(NIPS 2019), 32.
Bharara, S., Sabitha, S., & Bansal, A. (2018). Application of learning analytics using clustering data
mining for students’ disposition analysis. Education and Information Technologies, 23(2), 957–
984. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639- 017-9645-7
Bradley, P. S., Bennett, K. P., & Demiriz, A. (2000). Constrained k-means clustering. Microsoft
Research, Redmond, 20.
Casalino, G., Castellano, G., & Mencar, C. (2019). Incremental and adaptive fuzzy clustering for
virtual learning environments data analysis. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference
Information Visualisation (IV) (pp. 382– 387). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/IV.2019.00071
Chakrabarti, D., Dickerson, J. P., Esmaeili, S. A., Srinivasan, A., & Tsepenekas, L. (2022). A new
notion of individually fair clustering: 𝛼-equitable 𝑘-center. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (pp. 6387–6408).
Chang, L.-H., Rastas, I., Pyysalo, S., & Ginter, F. (2021). Deep learning for sentence clustering in
essay grading support. The 14th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM).
Chang, M.-H., Kuo, R., Essalmi, F., Chang, M., Kumar, V., & Kung, H.-Y. (2017). Usability
evaluation plan for online annotation and student clustering system– a tunisian university case. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Human Modeling and Applications in
Health, Safety, Ergonomics and Risk Management (pp. 241–254). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319- 58463-8_21
Chang, W., Ji, X., Liu, Y., Xiao, Y., Chen, B., Liu, H., & Zhou, S. (2020). Analysis of university
students’ behavior based on a fusion k-means clustering algorithm. Applied Sciences, 10(18), 6566.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/app10186566
Chaves, V. E. J., García-Torres, M., Alonso, D. B., Gómez-Vela, F., Divina, F., & Vázquez-Noguera,
J. L. (2020). Analysis of student achievement scores via cluster analysis. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on European Transnational Education (pp. 399–408). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 030-57799-5_41
Cheng, W., & Shwe, T. (2019). Clustering analysis of student learning outcomes based on education
data. In 2019 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1–7). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE43999.2019.9028400
Chhabra, A., Masalkovaite˙, K., & Mohapatra, P. (2021). An overview of fairness in clustering. IEEE
Access. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3114099
Chi, D. (2021). Research on the application of k-means clustering algorithm in student achievement. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer
Engineering (ICCECE) (pp. 435–438). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCECE51280.2021.9342164
Chierichetti, F., Kumar, R., Lattanzi, S., & Vassilvitskii, S. (2017). Fair clustering through fairlets. In
Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 5036–5044).
Chu, Y., & Yin, X. (2021). Data analysis of college students’ mental health based on clustering
analysis algorithm. Complexity, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9996146
Chu, Y.-W., Tenorio, E., Cruz, L., Douglas, K., Lan, A. S., & Brinton, C. G. (2021). Click-based
student performance prediction: A clustering guided meta-learning approach. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData) (pp. 1389–1398). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData52589.2021.9671729
Davies, D. L., & Bouldin, D. W. (1979). A cluster separation measure. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, (2), 224–227. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909
40
Del Bonifro, F., Gabbrielli, M., Lisanti, G., & Zingaro, S. P. (2020). Student dropout prediction. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intel- ligence in Education (AIED) (pp.
129–140). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-030-52237-7_11
Delgado, S., Morán, F., San José, J. C., & Burgos, D. (2021). Analysis of students’ behavior through
user clustering in online learning settings, based on self organizing maps neural networks. IEEE
Access, 9, 132592–132608. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3115024
Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., & Rubin, D. B. (1977). Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via
the em algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 39(1), 1–22.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517- 6161.1977.tb01600.x
Ding, D., Li, J., Wang, H., & Liang, Z. (2017). Student behavior clustering method based on campus
big data. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational Intelligence and
Security (CIS) (pp. 500–503). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/CIS.2017.00116
Dorans, N. J., & Cook, L. L. (2016). Fairness in educational assessment and measurement. Routledge
New York, NY.
Dovgan, E., Leskošek, B., Jurak, G., Starc, G., Sorić, M., & Luštrek, M. (2019). Enhancing BMI-based
student clustering by considering fitness as key attribute. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Discovery Science (pp. 155–165). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33778-
0_13
Du, H., Chen, S., Niu, H., & Li, Y. (2021). Application of dbscan clustering algorithm in evaluating
students’ learning status. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Security (CIS) (pp. 372–376). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/CIS54983.2021.00084
Dunn, J. C. (1973). A fuzzy relative of the ISODATA process and its use in detecting compact well-
separated clusters. Journal of Cybernetics, 3(3), 32–57. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01969727308546046
Dunn, J. C. (1974). Well-separated clusters and optimal fuzzy partitions. Journal of Cybernetics, 4(1),
95–104. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/01969727408546059
Dutt, A., Ismail, M. A., & Herawan, T. (2017). A systematic review on educational data mining.
IEEE Access, 5, 15991–16005. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2654247
Effenberger, T., & Pelánek, R. (2021). Interpretable clustering of students’ solutions in introductory
programming. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (AIED) (pp. 101–112). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78292-4_9
Esnashari, S., Gardner, L., & Watters, P. (2018). Clustering student participation: implications for
education. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Con- ference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA) (pp. 313–318). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/WAINA.2018.00104
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., Xu, X., et al. (1996). A density-based algorithm for discovering
clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) (Vol. 96, pp. 226–231).
Fahad, A., Alshatri, N., Tari, Z., Alamri, A., Khalil, I., Zomaya, A. Y., . . . Bouras, A. (2014). A survey
of clustering algorithms for big data: Taxonomy and empirical analysis. IEEE transactions on
emerging topics in computing, 2(3), 267–279. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/TETC.2014.2330519
Fang, Y., Shubeck, K., Lippert, A., Chen, Q., Shi, G., Feng, S., . . . others (2018). Clustering the
learning patterns of adults with low literacy skills interacting with an intelligent tutoring system. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM) (pp. 348–
354). ERIC.
Fasanya, B. K., & Fathizadeh, M. (2019). Clustering from grouping: A key to enhance students’
classroom active engagement. In 2019 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition. doi:
http://doi.org/10.18260/1-2–32511
Fenu, G., Galici, R., & Marras, M. (2022). Experts’ View on Challenges and Needs for Fairness in
Artificial Intelligence for Education. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education (pp. 243-255). Springer, Cham.
41
Flanagan, B., Majumdar, R., & Ogata, H. (2022). Fine grain synthetic educational data: Challenges and
limitations of collaborative learning analytics. IEEE Access, 10, 26230–26241. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3156073
Ford, M., & Morice, J. (2003). How fair are group assignments? A survey of students and faculty and a
modest proposal. Journal of Information Technology Education: Research, 2(1), 367–378.
Francis, B. K., & Babu, S. S. (2019). Predicting academic performance of students using a hybrid data
mining approach. Journal of medical systems, 43(6), 1–15. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-
019-1295-4
Furr, D. (2019). Visualization and clustering of learner pathways in an interactive online learning
environment. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Educational Data Mining
(EDM).
Gao, L., Wan, B., Fang, C., Li, Y., & Chen, C. (2019). Automatic clustering of different solutions to
programming assignments in computing education. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Global Computing Education (pp. 164–170). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3300115.3309515
Gardner, J., Brooks, C., & Baker, R. (2019). Evaluating the fairness of predictive student models
through slicing analysis. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Analytics
& Knowledge (pp. 225–234). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3303772.3303791
Ghadiri, M., Samadi, S., & Vempala, S. (2021). Socially fair k-means clustering. In Proceedings of the
2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT) (pp. 438–
448). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445906
Gulwani, S., Radiček, I., & Zuleger, F. (2018). Automated clustering and program repair for
introductory programming assignments. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 53(4), 465–480. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3296979.3192387
Gunawan, I., Kusumaningrum, D. E., Triwiyanto, T., Zulkarnain, W., Nurabadi, A., Sanutra, M. F. A.,
. . . others (2018). Hidden curriculum and character building on self-motivation based on k-means
clustering. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Education and Technology
(ICET) (pp. 32–35). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEAT.2018.8693931
Guo, H., & Wang, M. (2022). Analysis on the penetration of emotional education in college physical
education based on emotional feature clustering. Scientific Programming, 2022. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/2389453
Guo, Y., Chen, Y., Xie, Y., & Ban, X. (2022). An effective student grouping and course
recommendation strategy based on big data in education. Information, 13(4), 197. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3390/info13040197
Güvenç, E., & Çetin, G. (2018). Clustering of participation degrees of distance learning students to
course activity by using fuzzy c-means algorithm. In Proceedings of the 26th Signal Processing
and Communications Applications Conference (SIU) (pp. 1–4).
Hartnett, M. (2016). The importance of motivation in online learning. In Motivation in Online
Education (pp. 5–32). Springer. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 981-10-0700-2_2
Hassan, Y. M., Elkorany, A., & Wassif, K. (2022). Utilizing social clustering-based regression model
for predicting student’s GPA. IEEE Access, 10, 48948–48963. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3172438
Hooshyar, D., Pedaste, M., & Yang, Y. (2019). Mining educational data to predict students’
performance through procrastination behavior. Entropy, 22(1), 12. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3390/e22010012
Howlin, C. P., & Dziuban, C. D. (2019). Detecting outlier behaviors in student progress trajectories
using a repeated fuzzy clustering approach. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Educational Data Mining (EDM) (pp. 742 – 747).
Huang, J. B., Huang, A. Y., Lu, O. H., & Yang, S. J. (2021). Exploring learning strategies by sequence
clustering and analysing their correlation with student’s engagement and learning outcome. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT) (pp.
360–362). IEEE. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT52272.2021.00115
42
Huang, L., Wang, X., Wu, Z., & Wang, F. (2019). Feature selection for clustering online learners. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Educational Innovation through Technology
(EITT) (pp. 1–6). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/EITT.2019.00009
Hung, J.-L., Wang, M. C., Wang, S., Abdelrasoul, M., Li, Y., & He, W. (2017). Identifying at-risk
students for early interventions - a time-series clustering approach. IEEE Transactions on
Emerging Topics in Computing, 5(1), 45–55. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/TETC.2015.2504239
Hutt, S., Gardner, M., Duckworth, A. L., & D’Mello, S. K. (2019). Evaluating fairness and
generalizability in models predicting on-time graduation from college applications. In Proceedings
of the 12th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM), (pp. 79 – 88).
Iam-On, N., & Boongoen, T. (2017a). Generating descriptive model for student dropout: a review of
clustering approach. Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences, 7(1), 1–24. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13673-016-0083-0
Iam-On, N., & Boongoen, T. (2017b). Improved student dropout prediction in thai university using
ensemble of mixed-type data clusterings. International Journal of Machine Learning and
Cybernetics, 8(2), 497–510. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-015-0341-x
Iatrellis, O., Savvas, I. K., Fitsilis, P., & Gerogiannis, V. C. (2021). A two-phase machine learning
approach for predicting student outcomes. Education and Information Technologies, 26(1), 69–88.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639- 020-10260-x
Jain, A. K., & Dubes, R. C. (1988). Algorithms for clustering data. Prentice-Hall, Inc. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1990.10484648
Jia, L., Cheng, H. N., Liu, S., Chang, W.-C., Chen, Y., & Sun, J. (2017). Integrating clustering and
sequential analysis to explore students’ behaviors in an online chinese reading assessment system.
In Proceedings of the 6th IIAI International Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics (IIAI-AAI)
(pp. 719–724). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/IIAI-AAI.2017.55
Jin, X., & Han, J. (2010). Expectation maximization clustering (C. Sammut & G. I. Webb, Eds.).
Boston, MA: Springer US. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 0-387-30164-8_289
Jones, M., Nguyen, H., & Nguyen, T. (2020). Fair k-centers via maximum matching. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (pp. 4940–4949).
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (1990). Finding groups in data: an introduction to cluster analysis.
John Wiley & Sons. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470316801
Kausar, S., Huahu, X., Hussain, I., Wenhao, Z., & Zahid, M. (2018). Integration of data mining
clustering approach in the personalized e-learning system. IEEE Access, 6, 72724–72734. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2882240
Kemper, L., Vorhoff, G., & Wigger, B. U. (2020). Predicting student dropout: A machine learning
approach. European Journal of Higher Education, 10(1), 28–47. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/21568235.2020.1718520
Khalil, M., & Ebner, M. (2017). Clustering patterns of engagement in massive open online courses
(MOOCs): the use of learning analytics to reveal student categories. Journal of Computing in
Higher Education, 29(1), 114–132. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528-016-9126-9
Khan, A., & Ghosh, S. K. (2021). Student performance analysis and prediction in classroom learning:
A review of educational data mining studies. Education and Information Technologies, 26(1), 205–
240. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10230-3
Khayi, N. A., & Rus, V. (2019). Clustering students based on their prior knowledge. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM), (pp. 246 – 251).
Kizilcec, R. F., & Lee, H. (2022). Algorithmic fairness in education. Ethics in Artificial Intelligence in
Education.
Kleindessner, M., Samadi, S., Awasthi, P., & Morgenstern, J. (2019). Guaran- tees for spectral
clustering with fairness constraints. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) (pp. 3458–3467).
Kohonen, T. (1982). Self-organized formation of topologically correct feature maps. Biological
cybernetics, 43(1), 59–69. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00337288
43
Kosztyán, Z. T., Orbán-Mihálykó, É., Mihálykó, C., Csányi, V. V., & Telcs, A. (2020). Analyzing and
clustering students’ application preferences in higher education. Journal of Applied Statistics,
47(16), 2961–2983. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/02664763.2019.1709052
Kurniawan, C., Setyosari, P., Kamdi, W., & Ulfa, S. (2018). Electrical engineering student learning
preferences modelled using k-means clustering. Global Journal Engineering Education, 20(2),
140–145.
Kylvaja, M., Kumpulainen, P., & Konu, A. (2019). Application of data clustering for automated
feedback generation about student well-being. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSOFT
International Workshop on Education through Advanced Software Engineering and Artificial
Intelligence (pp. 21–26). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3340435.3342720
Le Quy, T., Roy, A., Friege, G., & Ntoutsi, E. (2021). Fair-capacitated clustering. In Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM21) (pp. 407–414).
Le Quy, T., Nguyen, T. H., Friege, G., & Ntoutsi, E. (2022a). Evaluation of group fairness measures in
student performance prediction problems. In Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Data Science for
Social Good @ ECML/PKDD 2022.
Le Quy, T., Roy, A., Iosifidis, V., Zhang, W., & Ntoutsi, E. (2022b). A survey on datasets for fairness-
aware machine learning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
e1452. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1452
Li, G., Alfred, R., & Wang, X. (2021). Student behavior analysis and research model based on
clustering technology. Mobile Information Systems, 2021. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9163517
Li, S., Chen, G., Xing, W., Zheng, J., & Xie, C. (2020). Longitudinal clustering of students’ self-
regulated learning behaviors in engineering design. Computers & Education, 153, 103899. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103899
Li, X., Zhang, Y., Cheng, H., Zhou, F., & Yin, B. (2021). An unsupervised ensemble clustering
approach for the analysis of student behavioral patterns. IEEE Access, 9, 7076–7091. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3049157
Li, Y., Liu, C., & Zhao, X. (2021). Research on the integration of col- lege students’ mental health
education and career planning based on feature fuzzy clustering. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Information Systems and Computer Aided Education (pp. 56–59). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3482632.3482644
Li, Y., & Sun, X. (2022). Data analysis and feedback system construc- tion of university students’
psychological fitness based on fuzzy clustering. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/6019803
Liu, F. (2021). Design and implementation of intelligent educational administration system using fuzzy
clustering algorithm. Scientific Programming, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9485654
Liu, H., Ding, J., Yang, L. T., Guo, Y., Wang, X., & Deng, A. (2019). Multi-dimensional correlative
recommendation and adaptive clustering via incremental tensor decomposition for sustainable
smart education. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing, 5(3), 389–402. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSUSC.2019.2954456
Liu, S., & d’Aquin, M. (2017). Unsupervised learning for understanding stu- dent achievement in a
distance learning setting. In Proceedings of the IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference
(EDUCON) (pp. 1373–1377). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/EDUCON.2017.7943026
Livieris, I. E., Tampakas, V., Karacapilidis, N., & Pintelas, P. (2019). A semi-supervised self-trained
two-level algorithm for forecasting students’ graduation time. Intelligent Decision Technologies,
13(3), 367–378. doi: https://doi.org/10.3233/IDT-180136
Lloyd, S. (1982). Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE transactions on information theory, 28(2),
129–137. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.1982.1056489
López, S. L. S., Redondo, R. P. D., & Vilas, A. F. (2017). Discovering knowledge from student
interactions: clustering vs classification. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (pp. 1–8). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3144826.3145390
44
MacQueen, J. (1965). Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In
Proceedings of the 5th Berkeley Symposium on Math., Stat., and Prob (p. 281). Retrieved from
http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bsmsp/1200512992
Mai, T. T., Bezbradica, M., & Crane, M. (2022). Learning behaviours data in programming education:
Community analysis and outcome prediction with cleaned data. Future Generation Computer
Systems, 127, 42–55. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.08.026
Masala, M., Ruseti, S., Dascalu, M., & Dobre, C. (2021). Extracting and clustering main ideas from
student feedback using language models. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) (pp. 282–292). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
78292-4_23
Maylawati, D. S., Priatna, T., Sugilar, H., & Ramdhani, M. A. (2020). Data science for digital culture
improvement in higher education using k-means clustering and text analytics. International Journal
of Electrical & Computer Engineering (2088-8708), 10(5). doi:
https://doi.org/10.11591/ijece.v10i5.pp4569-4580
McBroom, J., Yacef, K., & Koprinska, I. (2020). DETECT: A hierarchical clustering algorithm for
behavioural trends in temporal educational data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) (pp. 374–385). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
52237-7_30
McFarland, D. A., Khanna, S., Domingue, B. W., & Pardos, Z. A. (2021). Education data science: Past,
present, future. AERA Open, 7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/23328584211052055
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., & Galstyan, A. (2021). A survey on bias and
fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(6), 1–35. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3457607
Melka, J., & Mariage, J.-J. (2017). Efficient implementation of self-organizing map for sparse input
data. In International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence (IJCCI) (pp. 54–63). doi:
https://doi.org/10.5220/0006499500540063
Mengoni, P., Milani, A., & Li, Y. (2018). Clustering students interactions in elearning systems for
group elicitation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science and Its
Applications (pp. 398–413). Springer. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95168-3_27
Meyer, K. (2014). Education, justice and the human good: Fairness and equality in the education
system. Routledge.
Miles, J. A., & Klein, H. J. (1998). The fairness of assigning group members to tasks. Group &
Organization Management, 23(1), 71–96. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601198231005
Mishler, A., & Nugent, R. (2018). Clustering students and inferring skill set profiles with skill
hierarchies. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Educational Data Mining
(EDM).
Mojarad, S., Essa, A., Mojarad, S., & Baker, R. S. (2018). Data-driven learner profiling based on
clustering student behaviors: learning consistency, pace and effort. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 130–139). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91464-0_13
Moshkovitz, M., Dasgupta, S., Rashtchian, C., & Frost, N. (2020). Explainable k-means and k-medians
clustering. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (pp.
7055–7065).
Moubayed, A., Injadat, M., Shami, A., & Lutfiyya, H. (2020). Student engagement level in an e-
learning environment: Clustering using k- means. American Journal of Distance Education, 34(2),
137–156. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/08923647.2020.1696140
Mulvey, J. M., & Beck, M. P. (1984). Solving capacitated clustering problems. European Journal of
Operational Research, 18(3), 339–348. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(84)90155-3
Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Molina, M. F., Muñoz-Organero, M., & Kloos, C. D. (2014). Motivation and
emotions in competition systems for education: An empirical study. IEEE Transactions on
Education, 57(3), 182–187. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/TE.2013.2297318
45
Natilli, M., Monreale, A., Guidotti, R., & Pappalardo, L. (2018). Exploring students eating habits
through individual profiling and clustering analysis. In Proceedings of the
MIDAS/PAP@PKDD/ECML 2018 (pp. 156–171). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-13463-
1_12
Natita, W., Wiboonsak, W., & Dusadee, S. (2016). Appropriate learning rate and neighborhood
function of self-organizing map (SOM) for specific humidity pattern classification over southern
Thailand. International Journal of Modeling and Optimization, 6(1), 61. doi:
https://doi.org/10.7763/IJMO.2016.V6.504
Nazaretsky, T., Hershkovitz, S., & Alexandron, G. (2019). Kappa learning: A new item-similarity
method for clustering educational items from response data. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM). (pp 129 - 138).
Nen-Fu, H., Hsu, I., Chia-An, L., Hsiang-Chun, C., Jian-Wei, T., Tung-Te, F., et al. (2018). The
clustering analysis system based on students’ motivation and learning behavior. In Proceedings of
the Learning With MOOCS (LWMOOCS) (pp. 117–119). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/LWMOOCS.2018.8534611
Ng, A., Jordan, M., & Weiss, Y. (2001). On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 14.
Nguyen, P., & Vo, C. (2019). Early in-trouble student identification based on temporal educational
data clustering. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT)
(pp. 313–318). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIT48102.2019.00062
Ninrutsirikun, U., Watanapa, B., Arpnikanondt, C., & Watananukoon, V. (2018). A unified framework
for student cluster grouping with learning preference associative detection for enhancing students’
learning outcomes in computer programming courses. In Proceedings of 2018 Global Wireless
Summit (GWS) (pp. 266–271). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/GWS.2018.8686665
Ntoutsi, E., Fafalios, P., Gadiraju, U., Iosifidis, V., Nejdl, W., Vidal, M.-E., . . . others (2020). Bias in
data-driven artificial intelligence systems - an introductory survey. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1356. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1356
Oladipupo, O. O., & Olugbara, O. O. (2019). Evaluation of data analytics based clustering algorithms
for knowledge mining in a student engagement data. Intelligent Data Analysis, 23(5), 1055–1071.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3233/IDA- 184254
Orji, F., & Vassileva, J. (2020). Using machine learning to explore the relation between student
engagement and student performance. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
Information Visualisation (IV) (pp. 480–485). IEEE. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/IV51561.2020.00083
Palani, K., Stynes, P., & Pathak, P. (2021). Clustering techniques to identify low-engagement student
levels. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computer Supported Education
(CSEDU) (pp. 248–257).
Pamungkas, A. A. P., Maryono, D., & Budiyanto, C. W. (2021). Cluster analysis for student grouping
based on index of learning styles. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1808, p. 012023).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742- 6596/1808/1/012023
Park, J., Yu, R., Rodriguez, F., Baker, R., Smyth, P., & Warschauer, M. (2018). Understanding student
procrastination via mixture models. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Educational Data Mining (EDM). (pp 187-197).
Parvathavarthini, S., Sharvanthika, K., Jagadeesh, M., & Kishore, B. (2021). Analysis of student
performance in e-learning environment using crow search based fuzzy clustering. In Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC) (pp. 1784–
1787). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICOSEC51865.2021.9591920
Patel, S., Sihmar, S., & Jatain, A. (2015). A study of hierarchical clustering algorithms. In Proceedings
of the 2nd International Conference on Computing for Sustainable global Development
(INDIACom) (pp. 537–541).
46
Pelleg, D., Moore, A. W., et al. (2000). X-means: Extending k-means with efficient estimation of the
number of clusters. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
(Vol. 1, pp. 727–734).
Peña-Ayala, A. (2014). Educational data mining: A survey and a data mining-based analysis of recent
works. Expert systems with applications, 41(4), 1432–1462. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.08.042
Phanniphong, K., Nuankaew, P., Teeraputon, D., Nuankaew, W., Boontonglek, M., & Bussaman, S.
(2019). Clustering of learners performance based on learning outcomes for finding significant
courses. In Proceedings of the Joint International Conference on Digital Arts, Media and
Technology with ECTI Northern Section Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Computer and
Telecommunications Engineering (ECTI DAMT-NCON) (pp. 192–196). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTI-NCON.2019.8692263
Popov, A., Ovsyankin, A., Emomaliev, M., & Satsuk, M. (2020). Application of the clustering
algorithm in an automated training system. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1691, p.
012120). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742- 6596/1691/1/012120
Pradana, C., Kusumawardani, S., & Permanasari, A. (2020). Comparison clustering performance based
on moodle log mining. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 722, p.
012012). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/722/1/012012
Pratiwi, O. N., Rahardjo, B., & Supangkat, S. H. (2017). Clustering multiple mix data type for
automatic grouping of student system. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Technology Systems and Innovation (ICITSI) (pp. 172–176). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICITSI.2017.8267938
Preetha, V. (2021). Data analysis on student’s performance based on health status using genetic
algorithm and clustering algorithms. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC) (pp. 836–842). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCMC51019.2021.9418235
Premalatha, N., & Sujatha, S. (2022). Prediction of students’ employability using clustering
algorithm: A hybrid approach. International Journal of Modeling, Simulation, and Scientific
Computing, 2250049. doi: https://doi.org/10.1142/S1793962322500490
Purba, W., Tamba, S., & Saragih, J. (2018). The effect of mining data k-means clustering toward
students profile model drop out potential. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1007, p.
012049). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742- 6596/1007/1/012049
Purbasari, I., Puspaningrum, E., & Putra, A. (2020). Using self-organizing map (SOM) for clustering
and visualization of new students based on grades. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol.
1569, p. 022037). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1569/2/022037
Putra, A. A. N. K., Nasucha, M., & Hermawan, H. (2021). K-means clustering algorithm in web-based
applications for grouping data on scholarship selection results. In Proceedings of the International
Sym- posium on Electronics and Smart Devices (ISESD) (pp. 1–6). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISESD53023.2021.9501716
Qoiriah, A., Harimurti, R., Nurhidayat, A. I., et al. (2020). Application of k-means algorithm for
clustering student’s computer programming performance in automatic programming assessment
tool. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Science and Engineering (IJCSE
2020) (pp. 421–425). doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.2991/aer.k.201124.075
Rahmat, A. (2017). Clustering in education. European Research Studies Journal, 20(3).
Rakhmawati, N. A., Faiz, N., Hafidz, I., Raditya, I., Dinatha, P., & Suwignyo,A. (2021). Clustering
student instagram accounts using author-topic model. International Journal of Business
Intelligence and Data Mining, 19(1), 70-79. doi: https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIDM.2021.115954
Ramanathan, L., Parthasarathy, G., Vijayakumar, K., Lakshmanan, L., & Ramani, S. (2019). Cluster-
based distributed architecture for prediction of student’s performance in higher education. Cluster
Computing, 22(1), 1329–1344. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-017-1624-7
Rauthan, A., Singh, A. S., Singh, N., et al. (2021). Impact on higher education in pandemic: Analysis
k-means clustering using urban & rural areas. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
47
on Advances in Computing, Communication Control and Networking (ICAC3N) (pp. 1974–1980).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAC3N53548.2021.9725709
Rezaeinia, N., Góez, J. C., & Guajardo, M. (2021). Efficiency and fairness criteria in the assignment of
students to projects. Annals of Operations Research, 1–19. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
021-04001-7
Riazy, S., Simbeck, K., & Schreck, V. (2020). Systematic literature review of fairness in learning
analytics and application of insights in a case study. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computer Supported Education (pp. 430–449). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-86439-
2_22
Rihák, J., & Pelánek, R. (2017). Measuring similarity of educational items using data on learners’
performance. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Educational Data Mining
(EDM). (pp 16-23).
Rijati, N., Purwitasari, D., Sumpeno, S., & Purnomo, M. (2020). A decision making and clustering
method integration based on the theory of planned behavior for student entrepreneurial potential
mapping in indonesia. International Journal of Intelligent Engineering and Systems, 13(4), 129–
144. doi: https://doi.org/10.22266/ijies2020.0831.12
Rijati, N., Sumpeno, S., & Purnomo, M. H. (2018). Multi-attribute clustering of student’s
entrepreneurial potential mapping based on its characteristics and the affecting factors: Preliminary
study on indonesian higher education database. In Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Computer and Automation Engineering (pp. 11–16). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3192975.3193014
Romero, C., & Ventura, S. (2017). Educational data science in massive open online courses. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 7(1), e1187. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1187
Romero, C., & Ventura, S. (2020). Educational data mining and learning analytics: An updated survey.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(3), e1355. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1355
Roy, D., Bermel, P., Douglas, K. A., Diefes-Dux, H. A., Richey, M., Madhavan, K., & Shah, S. (2017).
Synthesis of clustering techniques in educational data mining. In Proceedings of the ASEE Annual
Conference & Exposition.
Ruipérez-Valiente, J. A., Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Delgado Kloos, C., et al. (2017). Detecting and
clustering students by their gamification behavior with badges: A case study in engineering
education. International Journal of Engineering Education, 33(2-B), 816–830.
Salwana, E., Hamid, S., & Yasin, N. M. (2017). Student academic streaming using clustering
technique. Malaysian Journal of Computer Science, 30(4), 286–299. doi:
https://doi.org/10.22452/mjcs.vol30no4.2
Šarić-Grgić, I., Grubišić, A., Šerić, L., & Robinson, T. J. (2020). Student clustering based on learning
behavior data in the intelligent tutoring system. International Journal of Distance Education
Technologies (IJDET), 18(2), 73–89. doi: https://doi.org/10.4018/IJDET.2020040105
Schmidt, M., Schwiegelshohn, C., & Sohler, C. (2019). Fair coresets and streaming algorithms for fair
k-means. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Approximation and Online Algorithms
(pp. 232–251). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39479-0_16
Schubert, E., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (2021). Fast and eager k-medoids clustering: O(k) runtime
improvement of the PAM, CLARA, and CLARANS algorithms. Information Systems, 101,
101804. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2021.101804
Shelly, Z., Burch, R. F., Tian, W., Strawderman, L., Piroli, A., & Bichey, C. (2020). Using k-means
clustering to create training groups for elite american football student-athletes based on game
demands. International Journal of Kinesiology and Sports Science, 8(2), 47–63. doi:
https://doi.org/10.7575//aiac.ijkss.v.8n.2p.47
Shen, S., & Chi, M. (2017). Clustering student sequential trajectories using dynamic time warping.
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM). (pp. 266-
271).
48
Shi, J., & Malik, J. (2000). Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8), 888-905. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/34.868688
Silva, D. B., & Silla, C. N. (2020). Evaluation of students programming skills on a computer
programming course with a hierarchical clustering algorithm. In Proceedings of the IEEE Frontiers
in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1–9). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE44824.2020.9274130
Singelmann, L., Alvarez, E., Swartz, E., Pearson, M., Striker, R., & Ewert, D. (2020). Innovators,
learners, and surveyors: Clustering students in an innovation-based learning course. In IEEE
Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE) (pp. 1–9). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE44824.2020.9274235
Sobral, S. R., & de Oliveira, C. F. (2021). Clustering algorithm to measure student assessment
accuracy: A double study. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 5(4), 81. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3390/bdcc5040081
Song, X. (2018). The fairness of a graduate school admission test in china: Voices from administrators,
teachers, and test-takers. The Asia-Pacific Education Researcher, 27(2), 79–89. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40299-018-0367-4
Supianto, A. A., Sa’diyah, N., Dewi, C., Rokhmawati, R. I., Wicaksono, S. A., Az-Zahra, H. M., . . .
Hirashima, T. (2020). Improvements of fuzzy c-means clustering performance using particle swarm
optimization on student grouping based on learning activity in a digital learning media. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Sustainable Information Engineering and
Technology (pp. 239–243). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3427423.3427449
Susanto, R., Husen, M. N., Lajis, A., Lestari, W., & Hasanah, H. (2021). Clustering of student
perceptions on developing a physics laboratory based on information technology and local wisdom.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Information Technology, Computer and
Electrical Engineering (ICITACEE) (pp. 68–73). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICITACEE53184.2021.9617483
Švábensky`, V., Vykopal, J., Čeleda, P., Tkáčik, K., & Popovič, D. (2022). Student assessment in
cybersecurity training automated by pattern mining and clustering. Education and Information
Technologies, 1–32. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-10954-4
Talebinamvar, M., & Zarrabi, F. (2022). Clustering students’ writing behaviors using keystroke
logging: a learning analytic approach in efl writing. Language Testing in Asia, 12(1), 1–20. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40468-021-00150-5
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M., & Kumar, V. (2016). Introduction to data mining. Pearson Education India.
Tang, P., Wang, Y., & Shen, N. (2020). Prediction of college students’ physical fitness based on k-
means clustering and SVR. Computer Systems Science and Engineering, 35(4), 237–246. doi:
https://doi.org/10.32604/csse.2020.35.237
Tang, Q., Zhao, Y., Wei, Y., & Jiang, L. (2021). Research on the mental health of college students
based on fuzzy clustering algorithm. Security and Communication Networks, 2021. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/3960559
Tasdemir, K., & Merényi, E. (2011). A validity index for prototype-based clustering of data sets with
complex cluster structures. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B
(Cybernetics), 41(4), 1039–1053. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMCB.2010.2104319
Tempelaar, D., Rienties, B., Mittelmeier, J., & Nguyen, Q. (2018). Student profiling in a dispositional
learning analytics application using formative assessment. Computers in Human Behavior, 78,
408–420. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.08.010
Thilagaraj, T., & Sengottaiyan, N. (2020). Implementation of fuzzy clustering algorithms to analyze
students performance using R-tool. In Intelligent Computing and Innovation on Data Science (pp.
287–294). Springer. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-3284-9_31
Urbina Nájera, A. B., De La Calleja, J., & Medina, M. A. (2017). Associating students and teachers for
tutoring in higher education using clustering and data mining. Computer Applications in
Engineering Education, 25(5), 823– 832. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/cae.21839
Varela, N., Montero, E. S., Vásquez, C., Guiliany, J. G., Mercado, C. V., Llinas, N. O.,. . . Palencia, P.
(2019). Student performance assessment using clustering techniques. In Proceedings of the
49
International Conference on Data Mining and Big Data (pp. 179–188). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9563- 6_19
Vasquez Verdugo, J., Gitiaux, X., Ortega, C., & Rangwala, H. (2022, March). FairEd: A Systematic
Fairness Analysis Approach Applied in a Higher Educational Context. In LAK22: 12th
International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference (pp. 271-281).
Vasuki, M., & Revathy, S. (2022). Analyzing performance of placement students record using different
clustering algorithm. Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE), 13(2), 410–
419. doi: https://doi.org/10.21817/indjcse/2022/v13i2/221302083
Vie, J.-J., Rigaux, T., & Minn, S. (2022). Privacy-preserving synthetic educational data generation. In
Proceedings of the EC-TEL 2022.
Vo, C. T. N., & Nguyen, P. H. (2018). A weighted object-cluster association-based ensemble method
for clustering undergraduate students. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Intelligent
Information and Database Systems (ACIIDS) (pp. 587–598). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-75417-8_55
Waluyo, E., Djeni, D., Pratama, L., & Anggraini, V. (2019). Clustering based on sociometry in
pythagoras theorem. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1211, p. 012058). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742- 6596/1211/1/012058
Wang, C., & Zha, Q. (2018). Measuring systemic diversity of chinese universities: A clustering-
method approach. Quality & Quantity, 52(3), 1331–1347. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-
0524-5
Wang, D.-Y., Lin, S. S., & Sun, C.-T. (2007). DIANA: A computer-supported heterogeneous grouping
system for teachers to conduct successful small learning groups. Computers in Human Behavior,
23(4), 1997–2010. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2006.02.008
Wang, M., & Lv, Z. (2022). Construction of personalized learning and knowledge system of chemistry
specialty via the internet of things and clustering algorithm. The Journal of Supercomputing, 78(8),
10997–11014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-022-04315-8
Wang, Q. (2021). Application of the intra cluster, characteristic of k-means clustering method in
english score analysis in colleges. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 1941, p. 012001).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742- 6596/1941/1/012001
Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Yang, Y., Liu, K., & Gao, B. (2019). Research on relevance analysis and
clustering algorithms in college students’ academic performance. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Information Technology in Medicine and Education (ITME) (pp. 730–
733). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ITME.2019.00167
Wang, Y., & Wang, Q. (2022). A student grouping method for massive online collaborative learning.
International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 17(3), 18–33. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v17i03.29429
Wang, Z., & Wang, J. (2022). Analysis of emotional education infiltration in college physical
education based on emotional feature clustering. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7857522
Ward Jr, J. H. (1963). Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. Journal of the
American statistical association, 58(301), 236–244. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1963.10500845
Waspada, I., Bahtiar, N., & Wibowo, A. (2019). Clustering student behavior based on quiz activities on
moodle lms to discover the relation with a final exam score. In Journal of Physics: Conference
Series (Vol. 1217, p. 012118). doi: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1217/1/012118
Watson, S. B., & Marshall, J. E. (1995). Heterogeneous grouping as an element of cooperative learning
in an elementary education science course. School Science and Mathematics, 95(8), 401–405. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1949- 8594.1995.tb10192.x
Wu, Y., Nouri, J., Li, X., Weegar, R., Afzaal, M., & Zia, A. (2021). A word embeddings based
clustering approach for collaborative learning group formation. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) (pp. 395–400). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030- 78270-2_70
50
Xia, X., Hui, Z., Chunming, Y., Xujian, Z., & Bo, L. (2021). Fairness constraint of fuzzy c-means
clustering improves clustering fairness. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Machine
Learning (ACML) (pp. 113–128).
Xiao, W., Ji, P., & Hu, J. (2021). A survey on educational data mining methods used for predicting
students’ performance. Engineering Reports. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/eng2.12482
Yadav, R. S. (2020). Application of hybrid clustering methods for student performance evaluation.
International Journal of Information Technology, 12(3), 749–756. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41870-018-0192-2
Yan, D., Huang, L., & Jordan, M. I. (2009). Fast approximate spectral clustering. In Proceedings of the
15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD)
(pp. 907–916).
Yan, Q., & Su, Z. (2021). Evaluation of college students’ english performance considering roche
multiway tree clustering. The International Journal of Electrical Engineering & Education. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/00207209211004207
Yang, Y. (2021). Evaluation model and application of college students’ physical fitness based on
clustering extraction algorithm. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information
Systems and Computer Aided Education (pp. 547–552). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3482632.3482748
Yin, X. (2021). Construction of student information management system based on data mining and
clustering algorithm. Complexity, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/4447045
Yotaman, N., Osathanunkul, K., Khoenkaw, P., & Pramokchon, P. (2020). Teaching support system by
clustering students according to learning styles. In Proceedings of the Joint International
Conference on Digital Arts, Media and Technology with ECTI Northern Section Conference on
Electrical, Electronics, Computer and Telecommunications Engineering (ECTI DAMT & NCON)
(pp. 137– 140). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ECTIDAMTNCON48261.2020.9090729
Zhang, N., Biswas, G., & Dong, Y. (2017). Characterizing students’ learning behaviors using
unsupervised learning methods. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (AIED) (pp. 430–441). doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61425-
0_36
Zhang, P., & Shen, Q. (2018). Fuzzy c-means based coincidental link filtering in support of inferring
social networks from spatiotemporal data streams. Soft Computing, 22(21), 7015–7025. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500- 018-3363-y
Zhang, S., Shen, M., & Yu, Y. (2021). Research on student big data portrait method based on
improved k-means algorithm. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Academic Exchange
Conference on Science and Technology Innovation (IAECST) (pp. 146–150). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/IAECST54258.2021.9695501
Zhang, T., Ramakrishnan, R., & Livny, M. (1996). BIRCH: an efficient data clustering method for
very large databases. ACM SIGMOD record, 25(2), 103–114. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/235968.233324
Zhang, T., Taub, M., & Chen, Z. (2022). A multi-level trace clustering analysis scheme for measuring
students’ self-regulated learning behavior in a mastery-based online learning environment. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference (LAK) (pp.
197–207). doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/3506860.3506887
Zhang, T., Yin, C., & Pan, L. (2017). Improved clustering and association rules mining for university
student course scores. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Intelligent systems
and Knowledge Engineering (ISKE) (pp. 1–6). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISKE.2017.8258808
Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia, O., Schlax, J., Jitomirski, J., Happ, R., Kühling-Thees, C., Brückner, S., &
Pant, H. (2019). Ethics and fairness in assessing learning outcomes in higher education. Higher
Education Policy, 32(4), 537–556. doi: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41307-019-00149-x
51
7 Appendix
Table 8 Clustering methods used in EDS
Clustering methods #Papers References
Adjei et al. (2017); Battaglia et al. (2017); Ding et
al. (2017); Iam-On and Boongoen (2017a); Jia et al.
(2017); Khalil and Ebner (2017); Hung et al. (2017);
López et al. (2017); Salwana et al. (2017); Rihák and
Pelánek (2017); Roy et al. (2017); Urbina Nájera et
al. (2017); T. Zhang et al. (2017); Aghababyan et al.
(2018); Akbar et al. (2018); Bharara et al. (2018);
Esnashari et al. (2018); Fang et al. (2018);
Kurniawan et al. (2018); Kausar et al. (2018);
Gunawan et al. (2018); Mengoni et al. (2018);
Mishler and Nugent (2018); Mojarad et al. (2018);
Ninrutsirikun et al. (2018); Natilli et al. (2018); Nen-
Fu et al. (2018); Purba et al. (2018); Tempelaar et al.
(2018); Rijati et al. (2018); Vo and Nguyen (2018);
C. Wang and Zha (2018); Dovgan et al. (2019);
Francis and Babu (2019); L. Huang et al. (2019);
𝑘-means 73 Nazaretsky et al. (2019); Oladipupo and Olugbara
(2019); Phanniphong et al. (2019); X. Wang et al.
(2019); Waspada et al. (2019); Almasri et al. (2020);
W. Chang et al. (2020); Chaves et al. (2020); Koszt-
yán et al. (2020); Maylawati et al. (2020); Mou-
bayed et al. (2020); Pradana et al. (2020); Qoiriah et
al. (2020); Shelly et al. (2020); P. Tang et al. (2020);
Rijati et al. (2020); Šarić-Grgić et al. (2020); Ahmed
et al. (2021); Chi (2021); Y.-W. Chu et al. (2021);
Iatrellis et al. (2021); G. Li et al. (2021); X. Li et al.
(2021); Masala et al. (2021); Preetha (2021); Putra et
al. (2021); Sobral and de Oliveira (2021); Susanto et
al. (2021); Rauthan et al. (2021); Q. Wang (2021);
Yang (2021); Yin (2021); S. Zhang et al. (2021); Y.
Guo et al. (2022); Hassan et al. (2022); Tale-
binamvar and Zarrabi (2022); Vasuki and Revathy
(2022)
López et al. (2017); Salwana et al. (2017); Shen and
Chi (2017); Rahmat (2017); Rihák and Pelánek
(2017); Akbar et al. (2018); Fang et al. (2018);
Mengoni et al. (2018); Mishler and Nugent (2018);
Kausar et al. (2018); C. Wang and Zha (2018);
Cheng and Shwe (2019); Dovgan et al. (2019); Kyl-
vaja et al. (2019); Nazaretsky et al. (2019);
Hierarchical clustering 31 Oladipupo and Olugbara (2019); S. Li et al. (2020);
Pradana et al. (2020); Silva and Silla (2020);
Singelmann et al. (2020); Popov et al. (2020); Yo-
taman et al. (2020); L.-H. Chang et al. (2021); Y.
Chu and Yin (2021); J. B. Huang et al. (2021);
Pamungkas et al. (2021); Preetha (2021); Mai et al.
(2022); M. Wang and Lv (2022); T. Zhang et al.
(2022)
Güvenç and Çetin (2018); Amalia et al. (2019);
Howlin and Dziuban (2019); Casalino et al. (2019);
Fuzzy 𝑐-means 17
Oladipupo and Olugbara (2019); Ramanathan et al.
(2019); Varela et al. (2019); Supianto et al. (2020);
52
Clustering methods #Papers References
Thilagaraj and Sengottaiyan (2020); Yadav (2020);
Y. Li et al. (2021); F. Liu (2021); Palani et al.
(2021); Parvathavarthini et al. (2021); Q. Tang et al.
(2021); Y. Li and Sun (2022); Premalatha and
Sujatha (2022)
Pratiwi et al. (2017); Gulwani et al. (2018); Fasanya
and Fathizadeh (2019); Nguyen and Vo (2019);
Distinctive clustering
9 Waluyo et al. (2019); McBroom et al. (2020); Ef-
methods
fenberger and Pelánek (2021); Z. Wang and Wang
(2022); Y. Wang and Wang (2022)
Ruipérez-Valiente et al. (2017); Urbina Nájera et al.
(2017); Mengoni et al. (2018); Park et al. (2018);
EM 6
Oladipupo and Olugbara (2019); Preetha (2021); T.
Zhang et al. (2022)
Alias et al. (2017); Salwana et al. (2017); Bara et al.
SOM clustering 5 (2018); Ahmad et al. (2019); Purbasari et al. (2020);
Delgado et al. (2021)
Mengoni et al. (2018); Dovgan et al. (2019); Gao et
Spectral clustering 5
al. (2019); Hooshyar et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2021)
Kausar et al. (2018); Oladipupo and Olugbara
DBSCAN 4
(2019); Du et al. (2021); X. Li et al. (2021)
Kausar et al. (2018); Furr (2019); Vasuki and Re-
𝑘-medoids 3
vathy (2022)
Affinity propagation 1 H. Liu et al. (2019)
Author-Topic Model 1 Rakhmawati et al. (2021)
Bio-inspired clustering 1 M.-H. Chang et al. (2017)
BIRCH 1 Dovgan et al. (2019)
CFSFDP-HD 1 Kausar et al. (2018)
CLARANS 1 Vasuki and Revathy (2022)
DP-means 1 Khayi and Rus (2019)
Farthest First clustering 1 Urbina Nájera et al. (2017)
𝑘-medians 1 C. Wang and Zha (2018)
Link-based cluster
1 Iam-On and Boongoen (2017b)
ensemble
Louvain clustering 1 Pradana et al. (2020)
OPTICS clustering 1 Švábensky` et al. (2022)
Roche multiway tree 1 Q. Yan and Su (2021)
𝑥-means 1 Phanniphong et al. (2019)
