(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
A Secure Multi-Party Computation Protocol for
Malicious Computation Prevention for preserving
privacy during Data Mining
Dr. Durgesh Kumar Mishra Neha Koria, Nikhil Kapoor, Ravish Bahety
Professor (CSE) and Dean (R&D), Computer Science Dept. (R&D)
Acropolis Institute of Technology & Research, Acropolis Institute of Technology & Research,
Indore, MP, India Indore, MP, India
mishra_research@rediffmail.com koria.neha@gmail.com, nikhilkapoor01@gmail.com,
ravish.bahety@gmail.com
ABSTRACT- Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMC) allows should be acknowledged that to compute results upon data
parties with similar background to compute results upon whose source is not known is not child’s play; and the
their private data, minimizing the threat of disclosure. The works undertaken until now have served a great purpose
exponential increase in sensitive data that needs to be passed
in enlightening the industry of the subtleties of this so-
upon networked computers and the stupendous growth of
called SMC problem.
internet has precipitated vast opportunities for cooperative
Thus motivated with the intention of solving this
computation, where parties come together to facilitate
SMC problem we proposed a new protocol
computations and draw out conclusions that are mutually
beneficial; at the same time aspiring to keep their private Encrytpo_Random through which we had put forward
data secure. These computations are generally required to be what we perceived, to be the most appropriate and
done between competitors, who are obviously weary of each- seemingly plausible solution to the SMC conundrum. The
others intentions. SMC caters not only to the needs of such methodology followed was quite elementary yet very
parties but also provides plausible solutions to individual comprehensible. Encrytpo_Random worked on a two
organizations for problems like privacy-preserving database
layer basis; it consisted of the parties (1st layer) who
query, privacy-preserving scientific computations, privacy-
aspire to draw out a result collectively and being
preserving intrusion detection and privacy-preserving data
apprehensive of each-others intentions appoint an
mining. This paper is an extension to a previously proposed
assumedly unbiased third party (2nd layer) to carry out the
protocol Encrytpo_Random, which presented a plain sailing
yet effective approach to SMC and also put forward an aptly computation and announce the result.
crafted architecture, whereby such an efficient protocol, In Extended Encrytpo_Random the domain of the
involving the parties that have come forward for joint- 2nd layer has been extended from a single third-party to
computations and the third party who undertakes such multiple third-parties, from whom a single entity is chosen
computations, can be developed. Through this extended at run time and given the responsibility of performing the
work an attempt has been made to further strengthen the
required computation. A proposal sounds overtly
existing protocol thus paving the way for a more secure
hyperbolic without a thorough layout of the architecture to
multi-party computational process.
aptly implement it. Thus, here we also present a
meticulously worked-out architecture to realize the
KEYWORDS- Complexity, Encryption, Decryption,
Encrytpo_Random, Extended Encrytpo_Random, Pool of protocols and also to showcase and answer the pertinent
function, Random Dissemination, Secure Multi-party queries that are bound to arise in the minds of the
Computation (SMC), Trusted Third Party (TTP). audience.
The modus-operandi of the protocol deters the
bodies involved to exhibit any malicious conduct by
1. INTRODUCTION presenting thoroughly planned impediments in the path of
the transfer of data among themselves. The security of
The SMC has been a problem that has attracted the information of the parties is of utmost importance in any
attention of scholars and the industry for quite some time. approach seeking to solve the SMC enigma. In our
Although a vast amount of work has been done upon the protocols we have taken adequate precautions so as to
subject, the perpetual implementation of the endeavors has guarantee the security of data of the involved parties.
only yielded a perennial hornet’s nest. Having said that, it Instead of sending the entire data blocks the parties break
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
them into packets and randomly distribute amongst to actually implement it. Another disadvantage of this
themselves, for a stipulated number of times. Provisions protocol is that, the anonymzier-layer has been assumed to
have been done so as to ensure that the parties do not get be incorruptible; if in case it becomes malicious then
to know whose data packets they are forwarding, and in many an information leak can occur.
stark contrast, the third party also doesn’t have even a To solve such problems we proposed a new
Lilliputian hint as to whose data packet a particular party protocol Encrytpo_Random[20], which involved only two
is sending. This necessitates the need of a secure channel layers: 1st Layer consisted of the parties that wish to
to transfer the data packets which have been dealt with in compute results and the 2nd Layer made of the Trusted
the deftly formed and apposite architecture. To further Third Party (TTP), that which computes the result for
conceal the identity of the data packets we apply an these parties. Here we are putting forward an extension
encrypting function upon the data packets; these with the aim of further strengthening the existing protocol.
encrypting functions also reach to the third party through We consider the third party as a trusted one on account
the same path and are used to decode the packets and that it computes the results correctly.
rearrange them to form data blocks.
3. INFORMAL DESCRIPTION
2. BACKGROUND
3.1 Encrypto_Random
The SMC came to the fore-front as the Millionaires
The previous attempts done to solve the SMC problem
problem described by Yao in [8]. U.Maurer considered the
were either too simple or gullible in their outlook that it
general SMC protocols [7]. For specific tasks like online
was quite easy for the various parties involved in the
auctions, public voting or online updating of the data there
process of computation to leak the data; or were too
exist very efficient and effective protocols. General SMC
complicated to be realized in the real world.
protocols are less effective than special purpose protocols.
Our protocols dare to rectify the fallacies of these
Maurer also defined the different types of security in
preceding works by proposing a new scheme for solving
databases [5]. Privacy preserving data mining using SMC
the SMC problem. The main aspect of SMC is the
has great importance and many applications have been
computation of data in a secure and private manner. Thus
developed [9, 14]. Du et al. reviewed the various
the handling of the data is the major concern. Keeping this
industrial problems and listed them in [1, 3]. Some of the
vital point of the SMC in mind, we put forward a simple
existing protocols are in the form of the circuit evaluation
but effective two-layer protocol. The layout of our
protocols, and encryption with homomorphism schemes.
protocol is straight forward, which makes is easy to
The first general constant round protocol for
implement; but we have put various checks at subsequent
secure two-party computations was given by Yao [16].
levels so as to ensure the security of the data of the
Yao’s original protocol considered only the case of semi-
incumbent parties. Encrypto_Random works on the simple
honest parties. An extension to the case of malicious party
technique that ‘n’ number of parties decide to coordinate,
was given by Lindell [17]. Goldreich et al. showed the
and thus need to put forward their data; obviously aspiring
existence of a secure solution of SMC problem [6]. The
not to give undue advantage to their competitors by
size of such protocols depend upon the number of parties
revealing their information. Thus they appoint a third
involved in the computation process.
party to compute upon their collective data and announce
A new concept was put forward by D.K.Mishra
the result publicly.
and M.Chandwani [18] through their multi-layer
Encrypto_Random exhibits two-layer
protocols. Initially a two-layer protocol along with a
architecture, activation of each layer being an alternate
tentative architecture for its implementation was
phenomenon. At the 1st layer the Parties (who wish to
proposed. This two-layer protocol was improvised by a
perform the computations) are active while at the 2nd
three-layer protocol in which an anonymizer layer was
layer the Third Party (who computes the result for the
added in between the participating parties and the third
parties) is active. The parties break their data blocks into
party. This new layer hid the information of the parties
packets (number of packets formed by each party is fixed,
from the third party, who computes the data and provides
as decided by the TTP). Then an encrypting function is
the result. In the next paper [19], this three-layer protocol,
used by each party to encode their data packets. This
was further extended into a four-layer protocol in which a
encrypting function is drawn out randomly by each party
packet layer was introduced. This new concept provided
from a pool maintained by the Third Party. These
security to the data from most of the malicious activity,
encrypted packets are then randomly sent to other
even if the third party is not a trusted one.
participating parties. This random distribution is
The magnanimity and the complexity of this
synchronized, and is realized by using a random function
protocol present an unusual paradox. On one hand owing
which can be initiated by any of the participating parties at
to its compounded and uncanny nature, this protocol
run time. This process of random dissemination of the
prevents most of the unscrupulous activities; but on the
data packets is carried out many times; which further
other hand, its intricate technicalities make it very difficult
guarantees the confidentiality of the data blocks. After a
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
certain number of this parceling out, these data packets are 4. Each party having an input can communicate
then sent to the third party; who has the resources to store with a trusted network connection.
all the incoming data packets. The TTP then decodes the 5. The communication channels used by the input
received data packets by using the pool of encrypting providing parties to communicate with the third
functions maintained by it, consequently re-arranging party are secure. This implies that no intruder can
them into whole data blocks. Now the computations are intercept the data transferred between them.
carried out as per the collective requirements of the parties 6. The function given to the domain of the parties
and the result is announced publicly. are not same, they are different.
7. Minimum three parties should be involved in the
3.2 Extended Encrypto_Random SMC.
8. The number of packets generated by each party is
Encrypto_Random gives an efficient and secure way of
the same, as decided by the TTP.
carrying out multi-party computations. Requisite measures
9. The packet sizes of the parties are equal, as
were taken to check the flow of data. But still a certain
decided by the TTP.
amount of hesitancy creeps into the mind of the observer
that too much of information is being leveraged upon the 10. The TTP has the resources to store all the
TTP. To take care of such doubts we here propose an incoming data packets and the encoded
extension to our existing work, wherein the computational functions.
layer consists of not one but multiple third parties. One out
of these many TTP is chosen at run time, and all data
5. ARCHITECTURE
packets are then forwarded by the parties on the 1st layer
to this TTP. This TTP then rearranges the data packets into 5.1 Encrypto_Random:
data blocks and consequentially calculates and announces
the result. Choice of the TTP is done on a random basis
and is undertaken by another randomization function, in-
Layer 2 (Computation
built in the architecture of the protocol. Layer)
As the TTP is not predetermined and is unknown Third Party
until the time of the computation, this decreases the
possibility of a joint malicious conduct by the parties and
the TTP. Also, since most of the activities take place at
run-time, it guarantees against any sort of unscrupulous
a w c e ti l v l. i t T ie h s e (j e o n i c n r t y p o t r i n i g n d f i u v n id c u ti a o l n ) s b a y r e t h s e e le v c a t r e io d u f s r o e m nt it a i e p s o a o s l P 2 P 3
maintained by each TTP, thus the parties does not
P
1
P
4
individually need to intimate the TTP as to which function
Layer 1 (Input Layer)
they have used. The data packets are distributed randomly
amongst the parties, that too a number of times, because as
when the parties will forward the data it will be a P
5
P
combination of various packets and thus the identity is n P 7 P 6
hidden.
Here special care has been taken to keep the
process very straight-forward for the parties. The chosen
Figure 1. The Existing Architecture
TTP however has to undertake a lot of efforts to decrypt
the data packets and to rearrange them back into whole Figure 1 depicts the simple architecture of
data blocks. But this is just a small price to pay for Encrypto_Random. According to this the 1st layer i.e. The
maintaining the secrecy of information, which is of utmost Input Layer comprise of all the parties that are involved in
importance for every organization. the computation process. Since all these parties are inter-
connected, the data packets of the respective parties are
randomly distributed amongst them, for a stipulated
4. ASSUMPTIONS number of times. Thus when the parties forward the data
packets, the Third Party receives the data packets that
The following assumptions have been stipulated:
belong to some other party rather than the one who has
1. TTP computes the result from the data provided
forwarded them. This ensures that the identity of the
to it by the parties.
parties is hidden in terms of which data packets belong to
2. It will do so by using a function, for which it will
them.
bring into effect a function generator.
3. TTP has the ability to announce the result of the The Third Party exists at the 2nd layer, i.e. The
computation publicly, although this won’t be Computation Layer, where the computations are carried
desirable in most of the cases. out. After receiving the data packets from the parties (at
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
layer 1), the data packets are re-arranged by the Third using randomization function (R). All data is sent to this
f
Party using the Pool of Functions. Once the data packets TTP, who then decodes the data packets, rearranges them
are reassembled the computation is carried out and the into whole data blocks; computes and announces the result
result is obtained. It seems to be a simple architecture but publicly.
provides various checks keeping in mind the fulfillment of Algorithm Extended Encrypto_Random:
the all the constraints of the SMC.
1. Define P ,P …, P as parties;
1 2, n
2. Define D as function pool;
3. Define F ,F …, F as encrypting functions;
1 2, n
5.2 Extended Encrypto_Random:
4. For party P to P do
1 n
begin
Break data block into packets;
Single TTP
(P K , P K P K)
selected at run n 1 n 2 … n r
time using /* Where K 1 , K 2 …Kr
Randomization designate the packets of a party
Function (R)
f */
Select function from pool (D);
TTP 1 TTP 2 TTP 3 . . . TTP m Attach encrypting value of function to
each packet;
Layer 2 (Computational Layer)
Compute S = P K + VF ;
nr n r r n
/* Where V , V V are the
1 2, …, r
values of function F )*/
n
end;
P 2 P 3
5. For r=1 to s, do
begin
P
1
P
4 Send S randomly to P ;
nr n
end;
Layer 1 (Input Layer)
6. Repeat step 5 for n times.
7. Select TTP using R.
f
P
5 8. For P to P , do
P n P 7 P 6 1 n begin
Send S to TTP;
nr
end;
Figure 2. The Proposed Architecture
9. TTP decodes S using F from D; and rearrange
nr n
Figure 2 depicts the extended architecture of our protocol. P K into data blocks;
n r
Instead of a single TTP, the computational layer (2nd
10. TTP computes and announces result;
layer) consists of a pool of TTP. Each TTP has the same
pool of functions, which were used previously by the
parties (1st layer) to encrypt their data packets. One out 7. ANALYSIS AND PERFORMANCE
these many TTP is chosen at run time and all data packets
Extended Encrypto_Random
are forwarded to it making it responsible for the regrouping
of data packets into data blocks and the subsequent Case 1: Joint malicious conduct by certain Parties.
required calculations.
The parties receive the data packets P K and the function
n r
value VF . At a given instant, if m number of parties get
r n
together, they will have the following information at their
6. FORMAL DESCRIPTION
disposal: 1). m*X number of packets, (X = number of
r r
Extended Encrypto_Random packets generated by a single party, as fixed by the TTP)
and 2). m number of encrypting functions. This
The extended protocol, like its predecessor, is based on information is useless for them, because they won’t be
the simple pretext of a group of parties (P 1 , P 2 …P n ) who having the encrypting functions of the other parties for
assign the task of computation to a TTP. Each party P n generating the whole blocks of data. Moreover it is highly
breaks its data block into number of packets (P K) and improbable that these m parties receive all the packets of a
n r
applies encrypting function (f , f …f ) chosen from the certain party, thus making the available information with
1 2 n
pool of functions (D). This breaking of the data blocks them redundant.
into packets and the application of the encrypting
Case 2: The chosen TTP becomes malicious.
functions is facilitated by the already existing provisions
deftly incorporated in the architecture of the protocol. The TTP receives the packets P K and the function value
n r
These encrypted packets (S = P K + VF ) are randomly VF . Also, it has the pool of random functions. At a given
nr n r r n r n
distributed among parties. A TTP is chosen at run time instant it has the set (P n K r , V r F n , pool of functions). The
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
TTP can assemble the data packets to form whole data
blocks, but in no case can relate any data block thus 1.2
formed to a certain party. Further, if there are a large
1
number of participating parties (which can be assumed to
be the real world scenario, and for which our protocol is 0.8
sincerely aimed at), then it becomes nearly impossible to
decisively relate a particular data block to a particular 0.6
party. This is also evident by the probabilistic curve, which
0.4
describes an inversely parabolic path and tends to 0 as the
number of parties increases. 0.2
Case 3: Joint malicious conduct by some Party and the 0
TTP. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
In the previous protocol there was a predetermined TTP, No. of parties
thus there was plausibility about some party goading the
TTP to exhibit corrupt behavior, and consequently give
undue advantage to such a party by revealing the
regrouped data blocks. This problem is taken care of in this
extended work, as the TTP is decided only at run time by
the protocol. Thus it becomes virtually impossible for any
party motivated by vindictive intent to collaborate with the
unknown TTP for a joint malicious conduct.
8. PROBABILISTIC EVIDENCE
Let P(x ) be the probability that a party turns malicious,
n
where n is the number of parties.
Thus, P(x ) = P(x ) = P(x ) = P(x ) = . . . =P(x ) = 1/n
1 2 3 4 n
(equal for all parties).
If at a given instant, a party P (say) intends to leak the
r
information of the other parties. The probability of the
number of packets that party can decrypt is given by
= number of packets of that party / total number of
packets.
= Xr / ( ∑n Xr)
r=1
Therefore, probability that one party exhibits malicious
conduct
= [1/n] * [Xr / ( ∑n Xr)]
r=1
Now let’s say r number of parties become malicious.
Thus, Probability for leak of the packets
= [r/n] * [ ∑r Xr)/ ( ∑n Xr]
r=1 r=1
Also, let P(t ) be the probability that the chosen TTP turns
m
malicious, where m is the number of total TTP out of
which one will be chosen.
Thus, P(t ) = P(t ) = P(t ) = P(t ) = . . . =P(t ) = 1/m
1 2 3 4 m
(equal for all TTP).
Therefore, Total Probability for leak of the packets is
given by
= 1/m * [r/n] * [ ∑r Xr)/ ( ∑n Xr]
r=1 r=1
suoicilaM
fo
ytilibaborP
latoT
tcudnoC
Encrypto_Random Extended Encrypto_Random
Figure 3. Total Probability for Leak of Data
n = number of parties coming together for joint
computation.
m = number of TTP from which one is chosen.
X = 4, fixed number of packets made by each of these n
r
parties (as decided by the TTP). Here has been taken as
example to construct the graph.
m = 4, fixed number of TTP taken as example to illustrate
the graph.
Let’s say that one party out of n decides to decrypt its data
packets. Thus, probability that it becomes successful in
exhibiting such malicious conduct is given by: (1/m *
1/n2).
This curve depicts an inversely hyperbolic path and
substantially proves that, as the number of participating
parties increases, the probability of malicious conducts
and the subsequent leakage of data decreases, and
ultimately tends to zero if the number of parties are
numerous.
9. CONCLUSION
Secure Multi-Party Computation is a well researched
topic. Quite a few protocols already exist, and work is
going-on on another handful. Through Extended
Encrypto_Random we have endeavored to present a
concept that emphasizes the need to keep the structure of
the proposed solution to the problem very forthright so as
to avoid ambiguities; at the same time ensuring the
security of information by taking efficient and intricate
measures. The data is first distributed and then sent
forward; assuring that no party becomes victim to
sabotage by other parties and also that, no party gets
undue privilege, as the sole responsibility of the
computation process is not vested upon a single entity.
The encrypted nature of data further hinders any
possibility of spiteful conduct. The possibility of
collaborative malefic behavior by some party and the TTP
has been completely curbed by concealing the identity of
the TTP until runtime. Our protocol also reduces the
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 3, No. 1, 2009
complexities that are encountered in three and four layer [15] Ivan Demgard and Yuvai Ishai, “Constant-Round Multi-Party
protocols. Computation using a Black-Box Pseudo Random Generator.” Aug
10, 2005.
[16] A C Yao, “How to generate and Exchange Secrets.” April 16, 2004.
[17] Yehuda Lindell, “Parallel Coin-Tossing and ConstantRound Secure
10. FUTURE SCOPE
Two-Party Computation.”
The function domain is being further developed and the [18] D. K. Mishra, M. Chandwani, "Secure Multi-Party Computation
Protocol using Ambiguous Identity," accepted for the publication in
transforming functions that leverage the proposed
Journal.
architecture in different areas are being fine-tuned. [19] D. K. Mishra, M. Chandwani, “Extended Protocol for Secure Multi-
Subsequent enhancement of the protocol is expected in the party Computation using Ambiguous Identity”. WSEAS Transaction
on Computer Research, Vol 2, issue 2, Feb 2007.
sense that instead of making a single TTP responsible for
[20] Neha Koria, Nikhil Kapoor, Ravish Bahety, D K Mishra,
calculating the result, multiple TTP are given the same set “Complexity Minimization in Secure Multi-Party Computation for
of data packets, upon which each of them will perform the Preserving Privacy during Data Mining.” Computing for National
Development, INDIACOM’09, 3rd National Conference, 26-27 Feb
same computations. Then the results of each of them are
2009.
compared to decide which of them are harmonious. If
AUTHORS PROFILE
more than half of the results are found synonymous, then
Dr. Durgesh Kumar Mishra
such a result can be authenticated.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Du, and M. J. Attalah, “Secure Multi - Party Computation
Problems and Their Applications: A Review and Open Problems.”
Tech Report CERIAS Tech Report 2001-51, Centre for Education Biography: Dr. Durgesh Kumar Mishra has received M.Tech.
and Research in Information Assurance and Security and degree in Computer Science from DAVV, Indore in 1994 and PhD
Department of Computer Sciences, Purdue University, West degree in Computer Engineering in 2008. Presently he is working as
Lafayette, IN 47906, 2001. Professor (CSE) and Dean (R&D) in Acropolis Institute of
[2] J. Vaidya, and C. Clifton, “Leveraging the Multi in Secure Multi- Technology and Research, Indore, MP, India. He is having around
Party Computation.” WPES’03 October 30, 2003, Washington DC, 20 Yrs of teaching experience and more than 5 Yrs of research
USA, ACM Transaction 2003, pp 120-128. experience. He has completed his research work with Dr. M.
[3] M. J. Atallah and W. Du., “Secure Multi-Party Computation Chandwani, Director, IET-DAVV Indore, MP, India in Secure
Geometry.” Seventh International Workshop on Algorithms and Multi- Party Computation. He has published more than 60 papers in
Data Structures (WADS 2001), Providence, Phode Island, USA, refereed International/National Journal and Conference including
Aug 8- 10, 2001, pp 136-152 IEEE, ACM etc. He is a senior member of IEEE and Secretary of
[4] W. Du, and M. J. Attalah, “Privacy-Preserving Cooperative IEEE MP-Subsection under the Bombay Section, India. Dr. Mishra
Scientific Computations.” IN 14th IEEE Computer Security has delivered his tutorials in IEEE International conferences in India
Foundation Workshop, Nova Scotia, Canada June 11-13, 2001. as well as other countries also. He is also the programme committee
[5] U. Maurer, “The Role of Cryptography in Database Security.” member of several International conferences. He visited and
SIGMOD 2004, June, Paris, France June 13-18, 2004, pp 29-35. delivered his invited talk in Taiwan, Bangladesh, USA, UK etc in
[6] O. Goldreich, S. Micali, and A. Wigderson, “How to Play Any Secure Multi-Party Computation of Information Security. He is an
Mental Game – A Completeness Theorem for Protocols with author of one book also. He is also the reviewer of tree International
Honesty Majority.” 19th ACM Symposium on the Theory Of Journal of Information Security. He is a Chief Editor of Journal of
Computation, 1987, pp 218-229. Technology and Engineering Sciences. He has been a consultant to
[7] U. Maurer, “Secure Multi-Party Computation made Simple.” industries and Government organization like Sale tax and Labor
Security in Computational Network (SCN’02), G. Persiano (Ed.), Department of Government of Madhya Pradesh, India.
Lecture notes in Computer Science, Springer- Verlag, Vol. 2576,
2003, pp 14-28. Nikhil Kapoor (India), He has done BE in
[8] A. C. Yao, “Protocols for Secure Computations.” In Proc. 23rd Computer Engineering and Science in 2009.
IEEE Symposium on the Foundation of Computer Science (FOCS), He has published paper in referred
IEEE 1982, pp 160- 164. International/National Journal and
[9] Agrawal, A. Evfimievski, and R. Srikant, “Information Sharing Conferences.
Across Private Databases.” SIGMOD- 2003, SAndiego CA, June 9-
11, 2003, pp 109-115.
[10] R. Canetti, “Secure and Composition of Multi-Party Cryptographic Neha Koria (India), She has done BE in
Protocols.” Journal of Cryptography, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2000, pp143- Computer Engineering and Science in 2009.
202. He has published paper in referred
[11] B. Pfitzmann, M. Schunter, and M. Waidner, “Secure Reactive International/National Journal and
System.” IBM Research Report RZ 3206, Feb 14, 2000. Conferences.
[12] J. VAidya and C. Clifton, “Privacy Preserving Association Rule
Mining in Vertically Partitioned Data.” 8thACM SIGKDD
Ravish Bahety (India), He has done BE in
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Computer Engineering and Science in 2009.
Mining(2002), pp 639- 644.
He has published paper in referred
[13] Y. LIndell and B. Pinkas, “Privacy Preserving Data Mining.”
International/National Journal and
Advances in Cryptology – CRYPRTO 2000, Springer- Verlag, Aug
Conferences.
20-24, 2000, pp 36-54.
[14] H. Kargupta, B. Park, D. Herchberher, and E. Johnson, “Collective
Data Mining: A New Perspective Toward Distributed Data MInig
Book, Philip Chan, AAA Press, 1999.
