5202
yaM
92
]GL.sc[
4v82080.1032:viXra
Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning
A Tutorial on Meta-Reinforcement
Learning
SuggestedCitation:JacobBeck,RistoVuorio,EvanZheranLiu,ZhengXiong,LuisaZint-
graf, Chelsea Finn and Shimon Whiteson (2025), “A Tutorial on Meta-Reinforcement
Learning”, Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning: Vol. 18, No. 2-3, pp 224–384.
DOI: 10.1561/2200000080.
Jacob Beck Risto Vuorio
University of Oxford University of Oxford
jacob.beck@cs.ox.ac.uk risto.vuorio@cs.ox.ac.uk
Evan Zheran Liu Zheng Xiong
Stanford University University of Oxford
evanliu@cs.stanford.edu zheng.xiong@cs.ox.ac.uk
Luisa Zintgraf Chelsea Finn
University of Oxford Stanford University
zintgraf@deepmind.com cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu
Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk
Thisarticlemaybeusedonlyforthepurposeofresearch,teaching,
and/orprivatestudy.Commercialuseorsystematicdownloading(by
robotsorotherautomaticprocesses)isprohibitedwithoutexplicit
Publisherapproval. Boston — Delft
Contents
1 Introduction 226
2 Background 230
2.1 Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
2.2 Meta-RL Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
2.3 POMDP Formalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
2.4 Example Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
2.5 Problem Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
2.6 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
3 Few-shot Meta-RL 248
3.1 Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods . . . . . . . . . . 252
3.2 Black Box Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260
3.3 Task Inference Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
3.4 Exploration and Meta-Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
3.5 Bayes-adaptive Optimality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
3.6 Supervision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291
3.7 Model-based Meta-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
3.8 Theory of Meta-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
4 Many-shot Meta-RL 307
4.1 Multi-task Many-shot Meta-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
4.2 Single-task Many-shot Meta-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
4.3 Many-shot Meta-RL Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
5 Applications 320
5.1 Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
5.2 Multi-agent RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
6 Open Problems 329
6.1 Few-shot Meta-RL Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 329
6.2 Many-shot Meta-RL: Optimization Issues and Standard
Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
6.3 Utilizing Offline Data in Meta-RL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
6.4 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
7 Conclusion 342
Appendix 344
References 346
A Tutorial on Meta-Reinforcement
Learning
Jacob Beck1*†, Risto Vuorio1*‡, Evan Zheran Liu2♢, Zheng Xiong1,
Luisa Zintgraf1§, Chelsea Finn2 and Shimon Whiteson1
1University of Oxford, UK; jacob.beck@cs.ox.ac.uk,
risto.vuorio@cs.ox.ac.uk, zheng.xiong@cs.ox.ac.uk,
zintgraf@deepmind.com, shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk
2Stanford University, USA; evanliu@cs.stanford.edu,
cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
While deep reinforcement learning (RL) has fueled multiple
high-profile successes in machine learning, it is held back
from more widespread adoption by its often poor data effi-
ciency and the limited generality of the policies it produces.
A promising approach for alleviating these limitations is to
cast the development of better RL algorithms as a machine
learning problem itself in a process called meta-RL. Meta-
RL is most commonly studied in a problem setting where,
given a distribution of tasks, the goal is to learn a policy
that is capable of adapting to any new task from the task
distribution with as little data as possible. In this survey, we
describe the meta-RL problem setting in detail as well as its
major variations. We discuss how, at a high level, meta-RL
*Contributed equally.
†Now at Oracle.
‡Now at Inflection.
♢Now at Imbue.
§Now at DeepMind.
Jacob Beck, Risto Vuorio, Evan Zheran Liu, Zheng Xiong, Luisa Zintgraf,
Chelsea Finn and Shimon Whiteson (2025), “A Tutorial on Meta-Reinforcement
Learning”, Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning: Vol. 18, No. 2-3, pp
224–384. DOI: 10.1561/2200000080.
©2025 J. Beck et al.
225
research can be clustered based on the presence of a task
distribution and the learning budget available for each indi-
vidual task. Using these clusters, we then survey meta-RL
algorithms and applications. We conclude by presenting the
open problems on the path to making meta-RL part of the
standard toolbox for a deep RL practitioner.
1
Introduction
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) considers a family of machine
learning (ML) methods that learn to reinforcement learn. That is, meta-
RL methods use sample-inefficient ML to learn sample-efficient RL
algorithms, or components thereof. As such, meta-RL is a special case of
meta-learning(Vanschoren,2018;Hospedalesetal.,2020;Huismanetal.,
2021), with the property that the learned algorithm is an RL algorithm.
Meta-RL has been investigated as a machine learning problem for a
significant period of time (Schmidhuber, 1987; Schmidhuber et al., 1997;
Thrun and Pratt, 1998; Schmidhuber, 2007). Intriguingly, research has
also shown an analogue of meta-RL in the brain (Wang et al., 2018).
Meta-RL has the potential to overcome some limitations of exist-
ing human-designed RL algorithms. While there has been significant
progress in deep RL over the last several years, with success stories such
as mastering the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016), stratospheric balloon
navigation (Bellemare et al., 2020), or robot locomotion in challenging
terrain (Miki et al., 2022). RL remains highly sample inefficient, which
limits its real-world applications. Meta-RL can produce (components
of) RL algorithms that are much more sample efficient than existing RL
methods, or even provide solutions to previously intractable problems.
226
227
At the same time, the promise of improved sample efficiency comes
with two costs. First, meta-learning requires significantly more data
than standard learning, as it trains an entire learning algorithm (often
across multiple tasks). Second, meta-learning fits a learning algorithm
to meta-training data, which may reduce its ability to generalize to
other data. The trade-off that meta-learning offers is thus improved
sample efficiency at test time, at the expense of sample efficiency during
training and generality at test time.
Example application Consider, as a conceptual example, the task of
automated cooking with a robot chef. When such a robot is deployed
in somebody’s kitchen, it must learn a kitchen-specific policy, since
each kitchen has a different layout and appliances. This challenge is
compounded by the fact that not all items needed for cooking are
in plain sight; pots might be tucked away in cabinets, spices could
be stored on high shelves, and utensils might be hidden in drawers.
Therefore,therobotneedsnotonlytounderstandthegenerallayoutbut
also remember where specific items are once discovered. Training the
robot directly in a new kitchen from scratch is too time consuming and
potentially dangerous due to random behavior early in training. One
alternative is to pre-train the robot in a single training kitchen and then
fine-tune it in the new kitchen. However, this approach does not take
intoaccountthesubsequentfine-tuningprocedure.Incontrast,meta-RL
would train the robot on a distribution of training kitchens such that
it can adapt to any new kitchen in that distribution. This may entail
learning some parameters to enable better fine-tuning, or learning the
entire RL algorithm that will be deployed in the new kitchen. A robot
trained this way can both make better use of the data collected and
also collect better data, e.g., by focusing on the unusual or challenging
features of the new kitchen. This meta-learning procedure requires more
samples thanthe simplefine-tuning approach,but itonly needsto occur
once, and the resulting adaptation procedure can be significantly more
sample efficient when deployed in the new test kitchen.
This example illustrates how, in general, meta-RL may be par-
ticularly useful when the need for efficient adaptation is frequent, so
the cost of meta-training is relatively small. This includes, but is not
228 Introduction
limited to, safety-critical RL domains, where efficient data collection
is necessary and exploration of novel behaviors is prohibitively costly
or dangerous. In many cases, a large investment of sample-inefficient
learning upfront (either with oversight, in a laboratory, or in simulation)
is worthwhile to enable subsequent improved adaptation behavior. This
example represents an aspirational application for meta-RL. In prac-
tice, meta-RL is applied to more limited robotics tasks such as robotic
manipulation (Akkaya et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2022b) and locomotion
(Song et al., 2020b).
Surveyscope Thisisasurveyofthemeta-RLtopicinmachinelearning
and leaves out research on meta-RL in other fields such as neuroscience.
Research on closely related machine learning topics is discussed in
Section 2.6. To capture the breadth and depth of machine learning
research on meta-RL, we surveyed the proceedings of several major
machine learning conferences, as well as specialized workshops from the
time period between 2017 and 2022. We found that a major portion
of the meta-RL literature emerged post-2016, with the lion’s share of
contributions being concentrated in three conferences: NeurIPS, ICML,
and ICLR. For a full list of conferences and workshops covered, see
Appendix A. While our survey primarily emphasizes these conferences
andthespecifiedtimeframe,wealsodiscussaselectionofrelevantpapers
from outside this scope. From the proceedings of these conferences and
workshops, we searched for papers that explicitly mention meta-RL as
well those that do not make an explicit reference but that we judged to
nevertheless fit the topic. Finally, we do not claim exhaustive coverage
of meta-RL research included in our survey scope but rather a holistic
overview of the most salient ideas and general directions.
Survey overview The aim of this survey is to provide an entry point to
meta-RL,aswellasreflectonthecurrentstateofthefieldandopenareas
of research. In Section 2, we define meta-RL and the different problem
settings it can be applied to, together with two example algorithms.
InSection3,weconsiderthemostprevalentproblemsettinginmeta-
RL:few-shotmeta-RL.Here,thegoalistolearnanRLalgorithmcapable
of fast adaptation, i.e., learning a task within just a handful of episodes.
229
These algorithms are often trained on a given task distribution, and
meta-learn how to efficiently adapt to any task from that distribution.
A toy example to illustrate this setting is shown in Figure 1.1. Here,
an agent is meta trained to learn how to navigate to different (initially
unknown) goal positions on a 2D plane. At meta-test time, this agent
can adapt efficiently to new tasks with unknown goal positions.
(a) Meta-TrainingTasks (b) RolloutatMeta-TestTime
Figure 1.1: Example of the fast adaptation meta-RL problem setting discussed in
Section 3. The agent (A) is meta-trained on a distribution of meta-training tasks to
learn to go to goal position (X) located on a unit circle around its starting position
(a). At meta-test time, the agent can adapt quickly (within a handful of episodes)
to new tasks with initially unknown goal positions (b). In contrast, a standard RL
algorithmmayneedhundredsofthousandsofenvironmentinteractionswhentrained
from scratch on one such task.
In Section 4, we consider many-shot settings. The goal here is to
learn general-purpose RL algorithms not specific to a narrow task
distribution, similar to those currently used in practice. There are two
flavors of this: training on a distribution of tasks as above, or training
on a single task but meta-learning alongside standard RL training.
Next, Section 5 presents some applications of meta-RL such as
robotics. To conclude the survey, we discuss open problems in Section 6.
These include generalization to broader task distributions for few-shot
meta-RL, optimization challenges in many-shot meta-RL, and reduction
of meta-training costs.
To provide high-level summaries of meta-RL research cited in this
survey, we collect representative papers discussed in each section in a
summary table presented within the section.
2
Background
Meta-RL can be broadly described as learning a part or all of an RL
algorithm. In this section, we define and formalize meta-RL. In order
to do so, we start by defining RL.
2.1 Reinforcement Learning
An RL algorithm learns a policy to take actions in a Markov decision
process (MDP), also called the agent’s environment. An MDP is defined
byatupleM = ⟨S,A,P,P ,R,γ,N⟩,whereS isthesetofstates,Athe
0
set of actions, P(s |s ,a ) : S ×A×S → R the transition function,
t+1 t t +
P (s ) : S → R is a distribution over initial states, R(s ,a ) : S×A →
0 0 + t t
R is a reward function, γ ∈ [0,1] is a discount factor, and N is the
horizon. We give the definitions assuming a finite horizon for simplicity,
though many of the algorithms we consider also work in the variable
and infinite horizon setting. A policy is a function π(a|s) : S ×A → R
+
that maps states to action probabilities. The interaction of the policy
with the MDP takes place in episodes, which start from initial states
sampled from P followed by N transitions between states where the
0
actions are sampled from the policy π and states from the dynamics P.
After the N transitions, a new episode begins starting from a freshly
230
2.2. Meta-RL Definition 231
sampled initial state. The reward for each transition is defined by the
reward function r = R(s ,a ). This defines a distribution over episodes
t t t
N−1
P(τ) = P (s ) Y π(a |s )P(s |s ,a ). (2.1)
0 0 t t t+1 t t
t=0
We refer to the data τ = (s ,a ,r ,...,s ,a ,r ,s ) collected
0 0 0 N−1 N−1 N−1 N
during an episode as a trajectory. Note that the trajectory consists of
one fewer action and reward than state, since the agent does not take
an action in the final state.
The objective of RL is to learn a policy that maximizes the expected
discounted return within an episode,
"N−1 #
J(π) = E X γtr , (2.2)
τ∼P(τ) t
t=0
where r are the rewards along the trajectory τ. In the process of
t
optimizing this objective, multiple episodes are gathered. We denote
the trajectories collected so far, across multiple episodes, including the
current (incomplete) trajectory, as D. When learning is done and D is
at its largest size, we write this as D = (τ ,τ ,...,τ ), where H is the
0 1 H
maximum number of episodes used for learning.
An RL algorithm is a function that maps the data to a policy. This
includes choosing the policies used for data collection during training.
These intermediate policies are not necessarily greedy with respect to
the RL objective but may take exploratory actions instead. In this
survey, we mostly consider parameterized policies with parameters
ϕ ∈ Φ. Therefore, we define an RL algorithm as the function ϕ = f(D).
2.2 Meta-RL Definition
RL algorithms are traditionally designed, engineered, and tested by
humans. The idea of meta-RL is instead to learn (parts of) an algorithm
f using machine learning. Where RL learns a policy, meta-RL learns
the RL algorithm f that outputs the policy. This does not remove
all of the human effort from the process, but shifts it from directly
designing and implementing the RL algorithms into developing the
232 Background
Figure 2.1: The relationship between the inner-loop and outer-loop in a meta-RL
algorithm.ThepolicyforMDPi,parameterizedbyϕi,producesthemeta-trajectory
dataDi.Theinner-loopf computesadaptedpolicyparametersforeachMDPbased
θ
on the meta-trajectory during the policy’s interaction with the MDP. To compute
the adapted parameters, the inner-loop can use all data collected in the MDP so far.
Theouter-loopcomputesupdatedmeta-parametersusingallofthemeta-trajectories
collected in all of the MDPs.
training environments and parameterizations required for learning parts
of them in a data-driven way.
Due to this bi-level structure, the algorithm for learning f is often
referred to as the outer-loop, while the learned f is called the inner-loop.
The relationship between the inner-loop and the outer-loop is illustrated
inFigure2.1.Sincetheinner-loopandouter-loopbothperformlearning,
we refer to the inner-loop as performing adaptation and the outer-loop
as performing meta-training, for the sake of clarity. The learned inner-
loop, that is, the function f, is assessed during meta-testing. We want
to meta-learn an RL algorithm, or an inner-loop, that can adapt quickly
to a new MDP. This meta-training requires access to a set of training
MDPs. These MDPs, also known as tasks, come from a distribution
denoted p(M). In principle, the task distribution can be supported
by any set of tasks. However, in practice, it is common for S and A
to be shared between all of the tasks and the tasks to only differ in
the reward R(s,a) function, the dynamics P(s′|s,a), and initial state
distributions P (s ). Meta-training proceeds by sampling a task from
0 0
the task distribution, running the inner-loop on it, and optimizing the
2.2. Meta-RL Definition 233
algorithm to improve the policies it produces. The interaction of the
inner-loop with the task, during which the adaptation happens, is called
a lifetime or a trial and is illustrated in Figure 2.2. A trial can consist
of multiple episodes. After an episode ends, a new one begins with the
initialstateofthenewepisodesampledfromtheinitialstatedistribution
P (s ). The concatenation of all the data during a single trial, D, which
0 0
may contain multiple episodes, is called a meta-trajectory.
Meta-Training
MDP 1 MDP 2 MDP 1 ...
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1 S0 S1 S0 S1 S0 S0 S1
Episode Episode Episode Episode Episode Episode
Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3
Figure 2.2: Meta-training consists of trials (or lifetimes), each broken up into
multiple episodes from a single task (MDP). In this example, each trial consists of
two episodes (H =2).
Parameterization We generally parameterize the inner-loop f with
θ
meta-parameters θ, and learn these parameters to maximize a meta-RL
objective. Hence, f outputs the parameters of π directly: ϕ = f (D).
θ ϕ θ
We refer to the policy π as the base policy. Frequently, the inner-loop
ϕ
will only adapt a subset of ϕ, which we refer to as the adapted policy
parameters, or the task parameters, since they are adapted to each task.
Some meta-RL algorithms use f to map D to ϕ at every MDP step,
θ
while others do so less frequently. In either case case, we use ϕ to
j
denote the jth set of parameters. Additionally, if the parameters are
bound to a specific task, and there are a finite number of tasks, we use
ϕi to indicate the jth set of parameters for the ith task. Likewise, we
j
use Di to indicate the data for the jth update for the ith task.
j
Meta-RL objective In standard RL, a Markov policy suffices to maxi-
mize the RL objective given by Equation 2.2. In contrast, in meta-RL,
234 Background
the inner-loop is an entire RL algorithm that outputs parameters of
policies as a function of the meta-trajectory. The performance of a
meta-RL algorithm is measured in terms of the returns achieved by
the policies π produced by the inner-loop during a trial on tasks M
ϕ
drawn from the task distribution. Depending on the application, slightly
different objectives are considered. For some applications, we can afford
a free exploration or adaptation period, during which the performance
of the policies produced by the inner-loop is not important as long as
the final policy found by the inner-loop solves the task. The episodes
during this phase can be used by the inner-loop for freely exploring the
task. For other applications, a free exploration period is not possible
and correspondingly the agent must maximize the expected return from
the first timestep it interacts with the environment. Maximizing these
different objectives leads to different learned exploration strategies: a
free exploration period enables more risk-taking at the cost of wasted
training resources when the risks are realized. Formally, the meta-RL
objective for both settings is:
(cid:20) (cid:20) (cid:12) (cid:21)(cid:21)
J(θ) = E
M∼p(M)
E
D
G(D)(cid:12) (cid:12)π
f (D)
,M , (2.3)
(cid:12) θ
where G(D) = PH PN γi∗N+jr is the discounted return in the
i=K j=0 i,j
MDP M starting at the Kth episode of the meta-trajectory D, r is
i,j
the jth reward in episode i, and H is the length of the trial, or the
task-horizon. This objective discounts rewards across episodes in D. The
exploration period is captured by K, also called the shot, which is the
index of the first episode during the trial in which return counts towards
the objective. K = 0 corresponds to no free exploration episodes.
The meta-RL objective defined by Equation 2.3 is evaluated in
expectation over samples from the task distribution, p(M). During
meta-training, the task distribution p(M) is usually accesses only via
sampling. This results in a generalization problem in meta-testing, as
testing tasks may not match the training tasks. This problem is made
worse when the meta-testing task distribution does not share support
with the training task distribution. Such out-of-distribution cases are
often studied in meta-RL.
2.3. POMDP Formalization 235
2.3 POMDP Formalization
The problem setting defining meta-RL, posed by Equation 2.3, can
additionally be viewed as a special case of a partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP) (Duan et al., 2016b; Humplik et al., 2019).
We specify the POMDP as a tuple of P = ⟨S,A,Ω,P,P ,R,O,γ,H⟩.
0
Here, Ω is the set of observations, O is the observation function, H is
the task-horizon, and the rest are defined as in an MDP. To resolve
ambiguity, when a function or variable depends on a particular MDP,
we use a superscript to indicate the dependence, e.g., RM, for a reward
function that depends on the MDP, M. The POMDP states, actions,
and transitions function similarly to an MDP. However, unlike in an
MDP, the agent does not observe the current state, s , which is hidden
t
from the agent. Instead, the agent observes an observation, o ∈ Ω, with
t
itsprobabilitydistributiondefinedbyO(o |s ,a ) : Ω×S×A → R .The
t t t +
POMDP policy is then a function that maps a history of observations
to a distribution over actions: π(a|τ ) : A×Ωt → R .
:t +
Given a distribution of MDPs, p(M), the POMDP corresponding to
themeta-RLproblemhasaspecificstructure.Inparticular,itmaintains
the identity of an MDP sampled from this distribution, i.e., the reward
function and the dynamics function, in its hidden state. Therefore,
the state of the POMDP is the identity and state of the sampled
MDP: s = (M,sM). The initial state distribution of the POMDP is
t t
responsible for sampling an MDP, M, and an initial MDP state, sM,
0
given the MDP: P (s ) = p(M)PM(sM). The reward function of the
0 0 0 0
POMDP is the same as the reward function of the underlying MDP:
R(s ,a ) = RM(sM,a ). The observation function deterministically
t t t t
returns the state of the underlying MDP, along with the previous action,
and the reward: o = (sM,a ,r ). In meta-RL, the unknown MDP
t t t−1 t−1
identity includes an unknown reward function. In order for the inner-
loop to learn an optimal policy for the MDP, it requires information
abouttheunknownrewardfunction.Therefore,theobservationincludes
the sampled reward, r , which is not always the case for observation
t−1
functions for POMDPs considered outside of meta-RL. The dynamics
function of the POMDP is that of the sampled MDP stored in the
hidden state. Additionally, after N timesteps of the MDP, the dynamics
236 Background
function of the POMDP must be constructed so that it transitions to
initial states sampled from PM of the underlying MDP. Formally,
0

 (M,sM ∼ PM) if t ≡ 0 mod N,
s = 0 0
t+1

(M,sM ) otherwise.
t+1
A single episode in this particular type of POMDP thus consists of an
entire trial, itself comprised of H episodes in the sampled MDP. When
the task-horizon, H, is reached, the POMDP episode terminates. In the
beginning of the next POMDP episode, a new POMDP state, including
a new MDP, is sampled from the initial state distribution P . Note
0
that the transition function depends on the timestep, t, which can be
stored in s, but is omitted from the state for brevity. Also, note that
the history of observations in this POMDP, τ, is the concatenation of
observations, (sM,a ,r ), across the H MDP episodes. Together,
t t−1 t−1
the sequence of these observations is equivalent to the dataset D from
Section 2. (This formalism can also be cast as a Contextual MDP, or
CMDP, Hallak et al., 2015, where the context is not shown to the
agent.) This perspective leads to the following insights into the meta-RL
problem.
First, from the theory of POMDPs, we know that the optimal
policy is either history-dependent or dependent on a sufficient statistic,
or the information state for the POMDP (Subramanian et al., 2022).
For the POMDP representing the meta-RL problem, it is therefore
possible to use either representation. In the case that the inner-loop,
f , approximates a general function of history, then the inner-loop
θ
and the policy it produces, πM, can be viewed together as a single
ϕ
object, forming a history-dependent policy, π (a|τ). While such history-
θ
dependent policies do not take into account the specific structure of
the meta-RL problem beyond that of a more general POMDP, they are
sufficient for solving the meta-RL problem. Alternatively, the optimal
policy may condition on a sufficient statistic that summarizes the
history.InaPOMDP,onesuchstatisticistheposteriordistributionover
POMDPstates,b(s) : S → R (Subramanianetal.,2022),oftenreferred
+
to as the belief state. In the case that the inner-loop approximates such
a belief state, the combined object can be seen as a policy dependent
on approximations of a sufficient statistic, π (a| ˆ b), where the inner-loop
θ
2.3. POMDP Formalization 237
computes ˆ b = f (τ). The form of these sufficient statistics can be more
θ
specific than in the general POMDP, since the hidden state, s, has
a specific form in meta-RL. In particular, one sufficient statistic for
meta-RL, given the current observable MDP state, is the posterior
distribution over tasks, b = p(M | τ) = p(RM,PM | τ), which we
discuss further in Section 3.5. This dichotomy in POMDP methods,
between history-dependent and belief-dependent, leads to two different
meta-RL methods: black box methods, discussed in Section 3.2, and
task inference methods, discussed in Section 3.3, respectively.
Second, this perspective enables us to draw connections to Bayesian
RL (Duff and Barto, 2002; Ghadirzadeh et al., 2021). In particular,
Bayesian RL solves this POMDP by explicitly maintaining a posterior
overtasksandupdatingitusingBayesianinference.TheBayesianframe-
work provides a convenient method for incorporating prior knowledge
and explicitly maintaining uncertainty. Using this framework a new
MDP can be constructed, where the state includes the posterior over
POMDP hidden states, or equivalently, the MDP state and a posterior
over tasks. In this case, the resulting MDP is called a Bayes-adaptive
Markov decision process (BAMDP). This construction allows learning a
Markovian policy to solve the meta-RL problem and therefore explores
optimally. BAMDPs and Bayes-optimal policies are discussed in Sec-
tion 3.5. However, since Bayesian RL methods must explicitly model
and update a distribution over MDPs, they are tractable only in simple
domains without strong approximations. For example, even scalable
Bayesian RL methods may be limited to discrete-space MDPs (Guez
et al., 2013). Instead of engineering approximations for the Bayesian
posterior, meta-RL methods may learn to model these components
as needed. For example, most meta-RL methods only require sample
access to the prior instead of the prior being explicitly known. The
meta-RL agent may learn to implicitly model the prior over tasks from
samples.
Finally,whileMeta-RLgenerallyconsidersadistributionoverMDPs,
it is also possible to consider a distribution over POMDPs. In this case,
each task is itself partially observable. This forms yet another type of
POMDP, called a meta-POMDP (Akuzawa et al., 2021). The meta-
POMDP can be written as a POMDP where only a part of the hidden
238 Background
state remains constant throughout a trial, and it is possible to adapt
existing methods to accommodate this structure (Akuzawa et al., 2021).
2.4 Example Algorithms
We now describe two canonical meta-RL algorithms that optimize
the objective given by Equation 2.3: Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML), which uses meta-gradients (Finn et al., 2017a), and Fast
RL via Slow RL (RL2), which uses a history dependent policy (Duan
et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2016). Many meta-RL algorithms are based
on concepts and techniques similar to those used in MAML and RL2,
making them excellent entry points to meta-RL.
MAML Many designs of the inner-loop algorithm f build on existing
θ
RL algorithms and use meta-learning to improve them. MAML (Finn
et al., 2017a) is an influential design following this pattern. Its inner-
loop is a policy gradient algorithm whose initial parameters are the
meta-parameters ϕ = θ. The key insight is that such an inner-loop
0
is a differentiable function of the initial parameters, and therefore the
initialization can be optimized with gradient descent to be a good
starting point for learning on tasks from the task distribution. When
adapting to a new task, the inner-loop MAML collects data using the
initial policy and computes an updated set of parameters by applying a
policy gradient step for a task Mi ∼ p(M):
ϕi = f (Di) = ϕ +α∇ J ˆ(Di,π ),
1 θ 0 0 ϕ0 0 ϕ0
where J ˆ(Di,π ) is an estimate of the returns of π in task Mi com-
0 ϕ0 ϕ0
puted on data Di collected using π . Note that ϕ = θ is a learnable
0 ϕ0 0
meta-parameter, which is not specific to any task. In contrast, ϕi are
1
the adapted policy parameters that are specific to the task Mi. Since
ϕ affects the initial policy, it not only determines initial rewards, but
0
also determines the data collected to produce ϕi.
1
To learn θ in the outer-loop, it must be updated based on its effect
on the initial policy and its effect on ϕi. To differentiate through the
1
adaptation process, MAML collects a second batch of data Di using
1
2.4. Example Algorithms 239
the policy π and computes the gradient of the returns of the updated
ϕi
policy with r1espect to the initial parameters across the tasks given by
1 M
X ∇ J ˆ(Di,π ),
M ϕ0 1 ϕi 1
i=0
where M is the number of sampled tasks, π is the policy for task
ϕi
Mi updated once by the inner-loop, and ∇ J ˆ( 1 Di,πi ) is the gradient
ϕ0 1 ϕ1
of the returns of the updated policy computed w.r.t. the initial policy
parameters. Such a gradient through an RL inner-loop is often referred
to as a meta-gradient. Descending the meta-gradient corresponds to
optimizing the outer-loop objective given by Equation 2.3. The version
ofMAMLdescribedhereconsidersonlyasingleupdateintheinner-loop
but for harder problems, the inner-loop can compute multiple updates.
The additional updates do not change the meta-gradient computation.
The algorithm is illustrated in Algorithm 1 and Figure 2.3.
Algorithm 1 MAML for Reinforcement Learning
1:
Initialize meta-parameters, θ, which here are the initial policy pa-
rameters, ϕ .
0
2: while not done do
3: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
4: for each task index, i do
5: Collect data D 0 i using the initial policy π ϕ0 .
6: Adapt policy parameters using a policy gradient step: ϕi ←
1
ϕ +α∇ J ˆ(Di,π )
0 ϕ0 0 ϕ0
7: Collect data D 1 i using the updated policy π ϕi .
1
8: end for
9: Update ϕ 0 using the meta-gradient: ϕ 0 ← ϕ 0 +
β∇ 1 P J ˆ(Di,π ).
ϕ0M i 1 ϕi
1
10: end while
Typically in MAML, the shot K and task-horizon H are chosen
such that the outer-loop objective only considers the returns of the last
policyproducedbytheinner-loop.Inthesimplestcase,thiswouldmean
settingK = 1andH = 2,i.e.,usingoneepisodeforcomputingtheinner-
loop update and another for computing the outer-loop objective. To
240 Background
Figure 2.3: MAML in the problem setting (left) and conceptually (right). The
meta-parameters θ are the initial parameters of the inner-loop policies ϕ . The
0
inner-loop computes new parameters ϕi adapted to task i using one step of a policy
1
gradient algorithm. The outer-loop updates the meta-parameters, from ϕ to ϕ′, to
0 0
optimize the performance of the policies after adaptation.
accommodate multiple updates in the inner-loop and sampling multiple
episodes with each policy for variance reduction, higher values of K
and H are often used.
RL2 Another popular approach to meta-RL is to represent the inner-
loop as a policy that is dependent on the entire history of its interaction
with the environment and train it on tasks from the task distribution
end-to-end with RL. As discussed in Section 2.3, when f is represented
θ
as a sequence model, f and π (a|s) can be viewed together as a
θ f (D)
θ
single history-dependent policy, π (a|s,D). This approach is the same
θ
as applying a history-dependent policy, as used in the more general
POMDP setting, to meta-RL as a special case. This history includes all
of the states, actions, and rewards the policy encounters during a trial.
This results in learning an adaptive policy that changes its behavior
as it gathers more information about the environment. A similar idea
has been explored for supervised learning, for example by Hochreiter
et al. (2001). For meta-RL specifically Duan et al. (2016b) and Wang
et al. (2016) propose a method called RL2, where the history dependent
policy is represented as a recurrent neural network (RNN). Using ϕ
to represent the RNN hidden state, we can write the recurrent policy
2.4. Example Algorithms 241
as π (a|s,ϕ). While in this example we focus on RNNs, any history
θ
dependent policy could be used.
Tooptimizethemeta-RLobjectivefromEquation2.3,RL2 treatsthe
trialasasinglecontinuoussequence,duringwhichtheRNNhiddenstate
is not reset, even if the trial spans multiple episodes in the underlying
MDP. The meta-parameters θ are the parameters of the RNN and other
neural networks used in processing the inputs and outputs of f . The
θ
task parameters ϕ are the ephemeral hidden states of the RNN, which
may change after every timestep. The operation of the algorithm is
illustrated in Algorithm 2 and Figure 2.4.
Algorithm 2 RL2 for Meta-Reinforcement Learning
1: Initialize meta-parameters θ (RNN and other neural network pa-
rameters)
2: while not done do
3: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
4: for each task index, i do
5:
Initialize RNN hidden state ϕi
0
Run a continuous trial consisting of multiple episodes
6:
7: for each timestep t in the trial do
8: Observe current state s t , previous action a t−1 , and previous
reward r
t−1
9: Update RNN hidden state with input [s t ,a t−1 ,r t−1 ]:
ϕi ← f (s ,a ,r ,ϕi )
t θ t t−1 t−1 t−1
10: Sample action a t ∼ π θ (·|s t ,ϕi t )
11: Execute action a t and receive reward r t
12: end for
13: end for
14: Update meta-parameters by optimizing Equation 2.3: θ ← θ +
β∇ 1 P G(Di).
θM i
15: end while
242 Background
Figure 2.4: RL2 in the problem setting (left) and conceptually (right). The inner-
loop algorithm is implemented by an RNN parameterized by the meta-parameters θ.
The RNNtakes as inputthe states, actions,and rewards from theenvironment. The
RNNhiddenstateϕ definesthetaskparametersateachtimestep,whicharepassed
t
as input to the MLP policy. The hidden state is not reset during a trial and instead
carries over across episode boundaries. The outer-loop is a standard RL algorithm.
These two distinct approaches to meta-RL, MAML and RL2, each
bring their unique advantages and disadvantages. On one hand, the
generality of MAML’s policy gradient algorithm in its inner-loop allows
it, under specific conditions, to learn a policy starting from its initial
state for any given task, including those outside the task distribution.
On the other hand, RL2 directly approximates the optimal policy of
the meta-RL objective, given by Equation 2.3. This policy, known as
Bayes-optimal, is the best policy for the task distribution and is further
discussed in Section 3.5. Bayes-optimal policies always choose actions
that maximize the expected return under uncertainty about the MDP
identity, whereas the policy-gradient dependent MAML can only update
when full episodes have been collected in the inner-loop. However, a
drawback of RL2 is that it faces a challenging generalization problem
when tested on tasks outside the task distribution. The end-to-end RL
training on a narrow task distribution may not result in a policy that
generalizes well outside the task distribution.
2.5. Problem Categories 243
2.5 Problem Categories
While the given problem setting applies to all of meta-RL, distinct
clustersintheliteraturehaveemergedbasedontwodimensions:whether
thetask-horizonH isshort(afewepisodes)orlong(hundredsofepisodes
or more), and whether the task distribution p(M) contains multiple
tasks or just one. This creates four clusters of problems, of which three
yield practical algorithms, as shown in Table 2.1. We illustrate how
these categories differ in Figure 2.5.
Table 2.1: Example methods for the three categories of meta-RL problems. The
categorization is based on whether they consider multi-task task distributions or a
single task and few or many shots.
Multi-task Single-task
RL2 (Duan et al., 2016b;
Few-Shot Wang et al., 2016), -
MAML (Finn et al., 2017a)
LPG (Oh et al., 2020),
STAC (Zahavy et al., 2020),
Many-Shot MetaGenRL (Kirsch et al.,
FRODO (Xu et al., 2020)
2019)
The first cluster in Table 2.1 is the few-shot multi-task setting. In
this setting, an agent must quickly – within just a few episodes – adapt
to a new MDP sampled from the task distribution it was trained on.
This requirement captures the central idea in meta-RL that we want to
use the task distribution to train agents that are capable of learning
new tasks from that distribution using as few environment interactions
as possible. The shots in the name of the setting echo the shots in
few-shot classification (Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017; Finn et al.,
2017a), where a model is trained to recognize new classes given only a
few samples from each. In meta-RL, the number of exploration episodes
K is more or less analogous to the shots in classification. This setting
is discussed in detail in Section 3.
While few-shot adaptation directly tackles the motivating question
for meta-RL, sometimes the agent faces an adaptation problem so
difficult that it is unrealistic to hope for success within a small number
of episodes. This might happen, for example, when adapting to tasks
that do not have support in the task distribution. In such cases, the
244 Background
Few-Shot Meta-RL Exploration
Evaluation
Multi-Task
Many-Shot Meta-RL
Single-Task
...
MDP 1
MDP 2
Tasks MDP 3
...
Adaptation
MDP 1
MDP 2
Tasks
MDP 3
gninraeL-ateM
Goal Zero-Shot
Learn new tasks Perform well from start
within a few Methods:
steps/episodes Rl2, L2RL, VariBAD
Meta-Learning
Few-Shot
Over a distribution of
Free exploration phase
tasks
Methods:
MAML, DREAM
Adaptation
gninraeL-ateM
Multi-Task
Goal
Learn new tasks
better than standard Solutions
RL algorithms Methods: MDP 1
Meta-Learning LPG, MetaGenRL MDP 2 Tasks
MDP 3
Over a more diverse
distribution of tasks.
I.e., more degrees of
freedom
...
Goal
Accelerate standard
RL algorithms Solutions Meta-Learning
Methods: Adaptation Adaptation Adaptation
STACX, FRODO
Meta-Learning MDP 1
Over windows in a
single task. (No reset)
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the different meta-RL settings considered in this survey.
Eachsettingissummarizedintermsofitsmotivatinggoal,taskdistribution,andthe
definingfeaturesofitsalgorithms.Thesmallembeddedfiguresontherightillustrate
the adaptation over task distributions in each setting. The tasks are shown as bars
depicting trials with the shot and task-horizon depicted by the lengths of the green
and red bars.
2.6. Related Work 245
inner-loop may require thousands of episodes or more to produce a
good policy for a new task, but we would still like to use meta-learning
to make the inner-loop as data-efficient as possible. We discuss this
many-shot multi-task setting in Section 4.
Meta-RL is mostly concerned with the multi-task setting, where
the inner-loop can exploit similarities between the tasks to learn a
more data-efficient adaptation procedure. In contrast, in standard RL,
agents are often trained to tackle a single complex task over many
optimization steps. Since this is often highly data-inefficient, researchers
have investigated whether meta-learning methods can improve efficiency
even without access to a distribution of related tasks. In such cases, the
efficiency gains must come from transfer within the single lifetime of the
agentorfromadaptationtothelocaltrainingconditionsduringtraining.
Methods for this many-shot single-task setting tend to resemble those
in the many-shot multi-task setting and are therefore also discussed in
Section 4.
The fourth cluster is the few-shot single-task setting, where a hypo-
thetical meta-learner would accelerate learning on a single task within
a few episodes without transfer from other related tasks. The short
lifetime of the agent is unlikely to leave enough time for the inner-loop
to learn a data-efficient adaptation procedure and produce a policy
using it. Therefore, there is to our knowledge no research targeting this
setting.
2.6 Related Work
Related Fields The objective of this survey is to introduce, summarize,
andhighlightresearchinthefieldofmeta-reinforcementlearning.Several
existing surveys (Thrun and Pratt, 1998; Hospedales et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020b; Parker-Holder et al., 2022; Kirk et al., 2023) include
some meta-RL methods, but differ in a few key ways. Thrun and Pratt
(1998) and Hospedales et al. (2020) both include meta-RL methods,
but focus on meta-learning more broadly, including meta-supervised
learning. Wang et al. (2020b) survey methods for few-shot learning,
but meta-RL is broader than few-shot learning, since meta-RL also
includes many-shot problems, and meta-RL additionally requires a
246 Background
task-distribution for learning in the few-shot setting. Parker-Holder
et al. (2022) survey methods for AutoRL, but also include non-learned
algorithmsforadaptingtonewMDPs.Kirket al.(2023)surveymethods
for generalization in RL, which includes meta-RL methods, but also
includes both non-learned algorithms and problems that do not require
adaptation, i.e., problems where a single policy can perform optimally
without specialization to the given task. Of all the related machine
learning fields, meta-supervised learning (meta-SL) and multi-task RL,
are the most closely related.
Meta-Supervised Learning There are many points of similarity be-
tweenmeta-RLandmeta-SLresearch.Likemeta-RL,meta-SLconsiders
a distribution of tasks. However, whereas the tasks in meta-RL are de-
fined by MDPs, the tasks in meta-SL are defined by fixed datasets.
Some algorithms have been proposed as methods for both meta-SL
and meta-RL (Finn et al., 2017a; Mishra et al., 2018). Moreover, many
algorithmic choices have analogues in both settings. For example, in
the few-shot setting, the use of attention over prior states in meta-RL
(Ritter et al., 2018a; Fortunato et al., 2019; Team et al., 2023), has
analogues in the kernel-based methods of supervised meta-SL (Santoro
et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016; Sung et al., 2018). These methods
are covered later in Section 3.3. Additionally, in the many-shot setting,
meta-learning optimizers and objective functions has been covered in
both meta-RL (Houthooft et al., 2018; Kirsch et al., 2019; Oh et al.,
2020;Bechtleet al.,2021;Luet al.,2022a;Lanet al.,2023)andmeta-SL
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Li and Malik, 2017; Bechtle et al., 2021).
These methods are covered in Section 4.3. Finally, imitation learning is
considered a closely related pursuit to RL, since both consider sequen-
tial decision making problems. Therefore, we discuss meta-supervised
learning for imitation learning in Section 3.6.
In addition to similarities in the problem settings and methods,
meta-RL and meta-SL have some key differences. In particular, meta-SL
generally considers fixed datasets while meta-RL does not. In meta-RL,
the adapted policy is responsible for collecting more data, which is fed
back into the dataset for adaptation. This introduces a problem of data
collection for adaptation to the given task. Moreover, since the meta-RL
2.6. Related Work 247
agent must adapt quickly, this requires that the agent also explores
quickly. Fast exploration and the resulting challenges are unique to
meta-RL and are a key theme discussed at length in Section 3.
Multi-Task RL Multi-task RL, like meta-RL, considers a distribution
of MDPs. However, whereas a meta-RL agent must identify the MDP
that it encounters, in multi-task RL, the agent has access to a ground-
truth representation of the task. While some solutions from multi-task
RL, such as PopArt (Hessel et al., 2019), are immediately applicable to
meta-RL (Grigsby et al., 2024), differences in evaluation also prevent
some methods from being applicable. For example, multi-task RL is
often evaluated over a finite set of discrete tasks, whereas meta-RL
agents often encounter new tasks at test time (Yu et al., 2020a; Teh
et al., 2017). This allows multi-task methods to train separate networks
for each task (Teh et al., 2017), whereas such approaches are not
immediately applicable in meta-RL.
Generally,multi-taskRLcanbeseenasaneasierversionofmeta-RL,
in the sense that the MDP representation is known, so there is no need
to learn it from data, nor to explore to get data for adaptation. In
fact, an entire category of meta-RL methods tries to explicitly infer the
MDP identity in order to reduce the meta-RL problem to the easier
multi-task RL problem, which is discussed in Section 3.3. However,
there can also be cases in which meta-RL is possible and multi-task
RL is not. Since generalization to different tasks in multi-task RL
occurs without conditioning on data at test time, it is always zero-shot
generalization. Such generalization may not be possible, in practice, if
the task representation is not sufficiently informative. For example, if
the task is represented as a one-hot categorical vector, then it may be
impossible to generalize to categories not seen during training. However,
while multi-task RL would fail, meta-learning may still be viable in this
case, if a more informative representation of the task can be inferred
from data, or if additional learning at test time can compensate for
sparsity in the training distribution.
3
Few-shot Meta-RL
In this section, we discuss few-shot adaptation, where the agent meta-
learns across multiple tasks and at meta-test time must quickly adapt
to a new, but related task in a few timesteps or episodes.
As a concrete example, recall the robot chef learning to cook in
home kitchens. Training a new policy to cook in each user’s home using
reinforcement learning from scratch would require many samples in each
kitchen, which can be wasteful as general cooking knowledge (e.g., how
to use a stove) transfers across kitchens. Wasting many data samples in
the homes of customers who purchased a robot may be unacceptable,
particularly if every action the robot takes risks damaging the kitchen.
Meta-RL can automatically learn a procedure, from data, for adapting
to the differences that arise in new kitchens (e.g., the location of the
cutlery). During meta-training, the robot may train in many different
kitchens in simulation or a setting with human oversight and safety
precautions. Then, during meta-testing, the robot is sold to a customer
and deployed in a new kitchen, where it must quickly learn to cook
in it. However, training such an agent with meta-RL involves unique
challenges and design choices.
In particular, here we summarize the literature in terms of the inner-
loop, the exploration, the supervision, and whether the RL algorithm is
248
249
model-basedormodel-free.Wecategorizebythetypeofinner-loop,since
the majority of research considers different inner-loop parameterizations.
Weconsiderexploration,sincelearningexplorationisuniquetometa-RL
compared to meta-SL, as discussed in Section 2.6. We classify closely
related problem settings, which utilize imitation learning, and some
other forms of supervision, by the supervision available. Finally, we
survey model-based approaches to meta-RL, since they present different
trade-offs to model-free methods. However, we only discuss model-based
methods briefly, as most meta-learning literature concerns the model-
free setting.
Meta-parameterization In this section, we first discuss three common
categories of methods in the multi-task few-shot setting. Methods in
these categories are further classified in Table 3.1. Recall that meta-RL
itself learns a learning algorithm f . This places unique demands on f
θ θ
and suggests particular representations for this function. We call this
design choice the meta-parameterization, with the most common ones
being the following:
• Parameterized policy gradient methods build the structure
of existing policy gradient algorithms into f . We review these in
θ
Section 3.1.
• Black boxmethodsimposelittletonostructureonf .Wereview
θ
these in Section 3.2.
• Task inference methods structure f to explicitly infer the un-
θ
known task. We review these in Section 3.3.
Whileeachofthesecategoriesrepresentsadiscreteclusterofresearch,
other authors cluster the research differently and may use different
names to refer to these clusters. For example, parameterized policy
gradient methods are sometimes referred to as gradient-based methods
(Finn et al., 2017a; Rakelly et al., 2019), or are referred to as part
of a larger category of methods in meta-SL called optimization-based
methods (Hospedales et al., 2020). Additionally, black box methods
250 Few-shot Meta-RL
Table 3.1: Representative examples of few-shot meta-RL research categorized by
method. The majority of methods fall into one of three clusters: Parameterized
policy gradient, black box, or task inference. These categories determine how the
inner-loop is parameterized. Within each cluster, we further categorize the methods.
ExplanationsofthesemethodscanbefoundinSections3.1,3.2,and3.3,respectively.
Parameterized Policy Gradients
Finnet al.(2017a),Zintgrafet al.(2019),ParkandOliva(2019),
MAML-like
andRaghuet al.(2020)
AdaptPolicy Yoonet al.(2018),Guptaet al.(2018b),Wanget al.(2020c),Zou
Distribution andLu(2020),andGhadirzadehet al.(2021)
Meta-gradient Al-Shedivatet al.(2018a),Stadieet al.(2018),Foersteret al.
estimation (2018a),Fallahet al.(2020),andTang(2022)
Alternative
outer-loop Sunget al.(2017),Mendoncaet al.(2019),andSonget al.(2020a)
algorithms
Black Box
RL2-Like Heesset al.(2015),Duanet al.(2016b),andWanget al.(2016)
AdaptPolicy Duanet al.(2016b),Wanget al.(2016),Zintgrafet al.(2019),
UsingContext Humpliket al.(2019),Zintgrafet al.(2020),Fakooret al.(2020),
Vector andLiuet al.(2021)
Inner-Loopwith
Miconiet al.(2018),Miconiet al.(2019),NajarroandRisi(2020),
Hebbian
Chalvidalet al.(2022),andRohaniet al.(2022)
Learning
Ohet al.(2016),Ritteret al.(2018b),Mishraet al.(2018),
Inner-Loopwith
Fortunatoet al.(2019),Ritteret al.(2021),Melo(2022),Xuet al.
Attention
(2022),Teamet al.(2023),andElawadyet al.(2024)
Task Inference
Multi-task Humpliket al.(2019),Kamiennyet al.(2020),Raileanuet al.
pre-training (2020),Penget al.(2021),andLiuet al.(2021)
Without
Guoet al.(2018),Rakellyet al.(2019),Zintgrafet al.(2020),Fu
privileged
et al.(2021),Zhanget al.(2021),andLuoet al.(2022)
information
Permutation Rakellyet al.(2019),Raileanuet al.(2020),Korshunovaet al.
invariance (2020),Imagawaet al.(2022),andBecket al.(2024)
AdaptPolicy
Using Penget al.(2021),Becket al.(2022),andBecket al.(2023)
Hypernetworks
and task-inference methods are sometimes referred to collectively as
context-based methods (Rakelly et al., 2019).
Along with the parameterization of the inner-loop, related design
choices include the representation of the base policy and the choice
of the outer-loop algorithm. Each method must additionally specify
which base policy parameters are adapted by the inner-loop, and which
251
are meta-parameters. We call this design choice the adapted policy
parameters. For each of the three types of meta-parameterizations in
this section, we discuss the inner-loop, the outer-loop, and the adapted
policy parameters.
Exploration While all these methods are distinct, they also share
some challenges. One such challenge is that of exploration, the process
of collecting data for adaptation. In few-shot learning, exploration
determineshowanagenttakesactionsduringitsfewshots.Subsequently,
an agent must decide how to adapt the base policy using this collected
data. For the adaptation to be sample efficient, the exploration must be
efficient as well. Specifically, the exploration must target differences in
the task distribution (e.g., different locations of cutlery). In Section 3.4,
wediscusstheprocessofexploration,alongwithwaystoaddstructureto
supportit.Whileallfew-shotmethodsmustlearntoexploreanunknown
MDP, there is an especially tight relationship between exploration
methods and task inference methods. In general, exploration may be
used to enable better task inference, and conversely, task inference may
be used to enable better exploration. One particular way in which task
inference may be used to enable better exploration is by quantifying
uncertainty about the task, and then choosing actions based on that
quantification. This method may be used in order to learn optimal
exploration. We discuss this in Section 3.5.
Supervision Meta-RLmethodsalsodifferintheassumptionsthatthey
make about the available supervision. In the standard meta-RL problem
setting, rewards are available during both meta-training and meta-
testing. However, providing rewards in each phase presents challenges.
For example, it may be difficult to manually design an informative task
distribution for meta-training, and it may be impractical to measure
rewards with expensive sensors during deployment for meta-testing.
In this case, unique methods must be used, such as automatically
designing rewards for the outer-loop, or creating an inner-loop that
does not need to condition on rewards. Alternatively, supervision that
is more informative than rewards can be provided. We review such
settings, challenges, and methods in Section 3.6.
252 Few-shot Meta-RL
Model-Based Meta-RL Some meta-RL methods explicitly learn a
model of the MDP dynamics and reward function. Such methods are
called model-based methods, in contrast to model-free methods that do
not explicitly learn a model of the environment. Model-based methods
confer advantages such as sample-efficient and off-policy meta-training.
Moreover, using an off-the-shelf planning algorithm with the learned
model can be easier for some task distributions than learning a compli-
cated policy directly. However, model-based methods generally require
theimplementationofadditionalcomponentsandcanhavelowerasymp-
totic performance. We discuss these trade-offs and the applications of
model-based RL to meta-RL in Section 3.7. We keep discussion in this
section brief, since most meta-RL literature considers mode-free RL, the
relevant trade-offs are similar in meta-RL and RL at large, and most
model-based meta-RL methods have an analogous model-free method
that will have already been discussed by that point.
Theory of Meta-RL Finally, we consider theoretical research on meta-
RL. While meta-RL is a relatively new area of research, several studies
have found interesting theoretical challenges in it. These insights relate
well to the empirical findings, which constitute the majority of the
research in meta-RL. In Section 3.8, we survey important theoretical
works in meta-RL. We believe there is a lot more to explore in the
theory of meta-RL and therefore hope this survey can motivate future
research.
3.1 Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods
Meta-RL learns a learning algorithm f , the inner-loop. This inner-loop
θ
is learned to maximize the meta-RL objective given by Equation 2.3,
over samples from a task distribution, p(M). However, during training,
wegenerallyonlyassumeaccesstosamplesfromthisdistribution.These
samples may be limited, and the distribution over which we want to gen-
eralize may be broad. Moreover, the distribution on which the meta-RL
is evaluated for meta-testing may differ from the distribution on which
the meta-RL agents is meta-trained. Each of these motivates the need
for learning to take place in the inner-loop algorithm f . This section
θ
discusses methods for building such structure into the inner-loop itself.
3.1. Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods 253
Wecalltheparameterizationoff themeta-parameterization.Inthis
θ
section, we discuss one way of parameterizing the inner-loop that builds
inthestructureofexistingstandardRLalgorithms.Parameterizedpolicy
gradients (PPG) are a common class of methods which parameterize the
learning algorithm f as a policy gradient algorithm. These algorithms
θ
generally have an inner-loop of the form
ϕ = f (ϕ ,D ) = ϕ +α ∇ J ˆ(D ,π ),
j+1 θ j j j θ ϕj θ j ϕj
where J ˆ(D ,π ) is an estimate of the returns of the policy π . For ex-
θ j ϕj ϕj
ample, recall the MAML algorithm discussed in Section 2.4. In MAML,
θ = ϕ ,andsotheinitializationisthemeta-learnedcomponent.Itisalso
0
possibletoaddadditionalpre-definedcomponentstotheinner-loop,such
as sparsity-inducing regularization (Lou et al., 2021). In general, what-
ever structure is not predefined, is a parameter in θ that is meta-learned.
In addition to initialization, the meta-learned structure can include
components such as hyper-parameters (Li et al., 2017). Some methods
also meta-learn a preconditioning matrix to approximate the curvature
of the objective, inspired by second-order optimization methods. These
methods generally have the form ϕ = ϕ + α M ∇ J ˆ(D ,π )
j+1 j θ θ ϕj θ j ϕj
(Park and Oliva, 2019; Flennerhag et al., 2020). While a value based-
method could be used to parameterize the inner-loop instead of a policy
gradient (Zou et al., 2021), value based-methods generally require many
more steps to propagate reward information (Mitchell et al., 2020),
and so are typically reserved for the many-shot setting, discussed in
Section 4. In this section, we focus on PPG methods. We begin by
discussing different parameters of the base policy that the inner-loop
may adapt. Then, we discuss options for outer-loop algorithms and
optimization. We conclude with a discussion of the trade-offs associated
with PPG methods.
Adapted policy parameters PPG algorithms commonly meta-learn
an initialization, and then adapt that initialization in the inner-loop.
Instead of adapting a single initialization, several PPG methods learn a
full distribution over initial policy parameters, p(ϕ ) (Yoon et al., 2018;
0
Gupta et al., 2018b; Wang et al., 2020c; Zou and Lu, 2020; Ghadirzadeh
et al., 2021). This distribution allows for modeling uncertainty over
254 Few-shot Meta-RL
policies. The distribution over initial parameters can be represented
with a finite number of discrete particles (Yoon et al., 2018), or with
a Gaussian approximation fit via variational inference (Gupta et al.,
2018b; Ghadirzadeh et al., 2021). Moreover, the distribution itself can
be updated in the inner-loop, to obtain a posterior over (a subset of)
model parameters (Yoon et al., 2018; Gupta et al., 2018b). The updated
distribution may be useful both for modeling uncertainty (Yoon et al.,
2018), and for temporally extended exploration, if policy parameters
are resampled periodically (Gupta et al., 2018b).
Alternately, some PPG methods adapt far fewer parameters in the
inner-loop. Instead of adapting all policy parameters, they adapt a
subset (Zintgraf et al., 2019; Raghu et al., 2020). For example, one
method adapts only the weights and biases of the last layer of the policy
(Raghu et al., 2020), while leaving the rest of the parameters constant
throughout the inner-loop. Another method adapts only a vector, called
the context vector, on which the policy is conditioned (Zintgraf et al.,
2019). In this case, the input to the policy itself parameterizes the range
of possible behavior. We write the policy as π (a|s,ϕ), where ϕ is the
θ
adapted context vector. The weights and biases of the policy, as well
as the initial context vector, constitute the meta-parameters that are
constant in the inner-loop. We visualize the use of a context vector in
Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Illustrationofmeta-RLwithout(left)andwith(right)acontextvector.
The context vector can be updated with backpropagation in a PPG method or by
a neural network in a black box method. When using a context vector, some of
the policy parameters are not adapted by the inner-loop, and are instead meta-
parameters set by the outer-loop.
3.1. Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods 255
Consider the algorithm Context Adaptation via Meta-learning
(CAVIA) (Zintgraf et al., 2019). CAVIA is similar to MAML but it only
adapts a context vector, which is initialized to the zero vector:
ϕ = 0,
0
ϕ = ϕ +α ∇ J ˆ(D ,π (·|ϕ )).
j+1 j θ ϕj θ j θ j
While the update to ϕ is the same as in MAML, here, ϕ represents a
vector passed as an input to the policy network, while all the weights
and biases of the network remain fixed throughout adaptation. One
benefit of adapting a subset of parameters in the inner-loop is that it
may mitigate overfitting in the inner-loop, for task distributions where
only a small amount of adaption is needed (Zintgraf et al., 2019).
Meta-gradient estimation in outer-loop optimization Effective learn-
ing in the outer-loop of PPG algorithms requires access to estimates
of meta-gradients, i.e., gradients of the outer-loop objective with re-
spect to the meta-parameters. Most commonly, the meta-gradients are
computed by directly optimizing Equation 2.3 with a policy gradient
algorithm. However, naively applying a policy gradient method in the
outer-loop can lead to a suboptimal bias-variance trade-off. Significant
research has considered how to improve this trade-off when estimating
meta-gradients for PPG methods (Stadie et al., 2018; Foerster et al.,
2018a; Rothfuss et al., 2019; Mao et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Fallah
et al., 2020; Vuorio et al., 2021; Tang, 2022; Fallah et al., 2021; Tang
et al., 2021; Tack et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022a). Next, we discuss the
bias-variance trade-offs in meta-gradient estimation for PPG methods
andthealgorithmsarisingfromchoosingdifferentpointsinthetrade-off.
The unbiased gradient of the meta-RL objective given by Equa-
tion 2.3 with respect to the meta-parameters θ can be computed as
follows. Since the distribution of tasks does not depend on the meta-
parameters, we can estimate the meta-gradient with respect to each
task separately and then combine. The expression for the meta-gradient
for a single task is given by
(cid:20) H (cid:12) (cid:21) H Z k
∇
θ
E
D
X G(D
k
)(cid:12) (cid:12)π
f
= ∇
θ
X G(D
k
)Y p(D
i
;ϕ
i
)dD
i
.
(cid:12) θ
k=K k=K i=0
256 Few-shot Meta-RL
Here, we take into account that the returns from previous trajectories
are not influenced by the policies of future trajectories. Therefore, we
restricted the product of trajectory probabilities to range only from
i = 0 to k. Since the probabilities of the trajectories depend on θ, we
use the log-derivative trick to get the gradient of the product
H Z k k
= X G(D )Y p(D ;ϕ )∇ logY p(D ;ϕ )dD .
k i i θ i i i
k=K i=0 i=0
Finally, we use the chain rule to get the meta-gradient:
H Z k k
= X G(D )Y p(D ;ϕ )X ∇ ϕ ∇ logp(D ;ϕ )dD
k i i θ j ϕj j j i
k=K i=0 j=0
NaivelyapplyingapolicygradientalgorithmtothereturnsPH G(D )
k=K k
does not compute this meta-gradient. To see why, we reorganize the
terms to get
H (cid:20) (cid:18) k−1 (cid:19)(cid:21)
X X
= E G(D ) ∇ ϕ ∇ logp(D;ϕ )+ ∇ ϕ ∇ logp(D ;ϕ ) ,
D k θ k ϕk k θ j ϕj j j
k=K j=0
where the first gradient term is the regular policy gradient on the
kth trajectory w.r.t. the meta-parameters, and the gradient terms in
the sum are the gradients of the policies on the jth trajectories for
0 ≤ j ≤ k−1 w.r.t. the meta-parameters. These latter terms, sometimes
called sampling-correction terms, are often omitted in practice, yielding
biased meta-gradient estimates (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018a; Stadie et al.,
2018).
Recall that PPG methods produce a sequence of policies, and gener-
ally optimize Equation 2.3 with K = H −n, where n is the number of
episodes collected by the final policy. Actions taken by any one policy af-
fectthedataseenbythenext,andthustheseactionsaffecttheexpected
return of the later policies. The sampling-correction terms account for
this dependence. Ignoring them amounts to ignoring actions from earlier
policies when training the inner-loop to optimize the meta-RL objective
and thus introduces bias to the meta-gradient estimation (Al-Shedivat
et al., 2018a). This bias can sometimes be detrimental to the meta-
learning performance but the high variance of the unbiased estimator
3.1. Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods 257
often dominates (Stadie et al., 2018; Fallah et al., 2020; Vuorio et al.,
2021).
Significantresearchhasconsideredameta-gradientestimatorderived
originally for computing higher-order meta-gradients (Foerster et al.,
2018a; Rothfuss et al., 2019; Farquhar et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019;
Mao et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2021; Tang, 2022; Liu et al., 2022b). In
practice, PPG algorithms use a sample-based policy gradient algorithm
for updating the policy parameters in the inner-loop. The higher-order
meta-gradients of the sample-based inner-loop are different from those
of an inner-loop that uses the expected policy gradient. Foerster et al.
(2018a) and Rothfuss et al. (2019) argue that the higher-order meta-
gradients of the sample-based inner-loop should approximate those of
the expected inner-loop and derive alternative sample-based inner-loop
updatefunctionsforthatpurpose.Whilethesemeta-gradientestimators
are still biased, their variance has a more benign dependence on the
inner-loop sample size than the unbiased meta-gradient estimator and
therefore can achieve a better point in the bias-variance trade-off than
either the naive or the unbiased meta-gradient estimators (Tang et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022b). To further reduce the variance of this class
of meta-gradient estimators, Rothfuss et al. (2019), Farquhar et al.
(2019), Liu et al. (2019), and Mao et al. (2019) propose to ignore certain
high-variance terms in the estimator and introduce baselines.
Alternatively, some PPG methods do not require higher-order meta-
gradients. For example, Finn et al. (2017a) use a first-order approxima-
tion of the meta-gradient, whereas Song et al. (2020a) use gradient-free
optimization (see Nichol et al., 2018a for another first-order approx-
imation proposed for supervised meta-learning, and recently used in
meta-RL,Renet al.,2022a.)Furthermore,whenmeta-learninganinitial-
ization as in MAML, for a limited number of tasks or limited amount of
data in the inner-loop, it may even be preferable to set the inner-loop to
take no steps at all during meta-training, i.e., without adapting to each
task (Gao and Sener, 2020). In this case, task adaptation occurs only
through fine-tuning at test-time. The lack of explicit meta-learning can
be seen as a limitation of the meta-learning approach and is discussed
further in Section 6. Additionally, it is possible to use a value-based
algorithm in the outer-loop, instead of a policy gradient algorithm,
which avoids meta-gradients altogether (Sung et al., 2017).
258 Few-shot Meta-RL
Outer-loopalgorithms WhilemostPPGmethodsuseapolicy-gradient
algorithm in the outer-loop, other alternatives are possible (Sung et
al., 2017; Mendonca et al., 2019). For example, one can train a critic,
Q (s,a,D),using-TDerrorintheouter-loop,thenreusethiscriticinthe
θ
inner-loop (Sung et al., 2017). Alternatively, instead of estimating meta-
gradients via backpropagation, evolution strategies (ES) (Rechenberg,
1971; Wierstra et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2017) may be used (Song
et al., 2020a). Additionally, one can train task-specific experts and
then use these for imitation learning in the outer-loop. While neither
directlylearnexploratorybehaviorbyoptimizingEquation2.3,theycan
work in practice. We provide a more complete discussion of outer-loop
supervision in Section 3.6.
PPG trade-offs One of the primary benefits of PPG algorithms is
that they produce an inner-loop that converges to a locally optimal
policy, even when relatively few samples are available for meta-training
or when the task distribution differs from meta-training to meta-testing.
PPG inner-loops are generally guaranteed to converge under the same
assumptions as standard policy gradient methods. For example, the
MAML inner-loop converges with the same guarantees as REINFORCE
(Williams,1992),sinceitsimplyrunsREINFORCEfromameta-learned
initialization.Evenconvergenceboundsarepossible(Fallahet al.,2021).
However,aswithanystochasticgradientalgorithm,theguaranteesgiven
by REINFORCE are rather weak. Stochastic gradient algorithms, with
a sufficiently small learning rate, only converge to a local optimum, and
this can be problematic in practice in meta-RL (Xiong et al., 2021).
Moreover, in some cases, a step of REINFORCE can even make the
policy worse on the task (Deleu and Bengio, 2018). We reproduce
empirical results from Xiong et al. (2021) in Figure 3.2. While the
PPG method, MAML, eventually converges to performant policies on
many out-of-distribution tasks, it fails to do so in practice on some
environments, such as those with sparse rewards. Moreover, Xiong et al.
(2021) show that black-box methods can be made to converge similarly
in practice by continuing to meta-train with gradient steps at meta-test
time. Having a learning algorithm that eventually adapts to a novel task
3.1. Parameterized Policy Gradient Methods 259
is desirable, since it reduces the dependence on seeing many relevant
tasks during meta-training.
Although parameterizing f as a policy gradient method may ensure
θ
that adaptation generalizes, this structure also presents a trade-off.
Typically, the inner-loop policy gradient has high variance and requires
a value estimate covering the full episode, so estimating the gradient
generally requires many episodes. Hence, PPG methods are generally
not well-suited to few-shot problems that require stable adaption at
every timestep or within very few episodes in the inner-loop. This can
result in decreased performance relative to black-box methods, as seen,
for example, in the sparse reward environments that require highly spe-
cialized and systematic exploration, as depicted in Figure 3.2. Moreover,
PPG methods are often sample-inefficient during meta-training as well,
because the outer-loop generally relies on on-policy evaluation, rather
than an off-policy method that can reuse data efficiently.
Figure 3.2: Out-of-distribution generalization metrics reproduced from Xiong et al.
(2021). MAML and RL2 are evaluated on variants of the environment depicted in
Figure 1.1, with greater scores (darker blue) indicating a greater degree of recovered
performance. While the canonical PPG method, MAML, is able to generalize better
to out-of-distribution than the black-box method, RL2, on environments with dense
reward,MAMLgeneralizesworseonsomeenvironmentsinpractice.MAMLperforms
especially poorly on sparse reward environments requiring systematic exploration
that is highly specific to the task distribution.
In general, there is a trade-off between generalization to novel tasks
and specialization over a given task distribution. How much structure is
imposed by the parameterization of f determines where each algorithm
θ
lies on this spectrum. The structure of PPG methods places them near
260 Few-shot Meta-RL
the end of the spectrum that ensures generalization. This is visualized
in Figure 3.3. While this spectrum summarizes current methods, the
trade-off is not necessarily inherent to the problem setting, and future
work could investigate methods that achieve the best of both worlds. In
the next section, we discuss methods at the other end of the spectrum.
PPG Method Black Box Method
Generalization Generalization
Specialization Specialization
MAML RL2
Structure Structure
Inductive bias in structure Inductive bias from data
Figure 3.3: The meta-parameterization spectrum. On the left are methods like
MAML that hard-code the structure of policy gradients into the inner-loop. Such
methods generalize better. On the right are black box methods, which learn all of
the structure of the inner-loop from data. Such methods can specialize to the task
distribution better.
3.2 Black Box Methods
In contrast to PPG methods, black box methods are near the other end
of the spectrum. Black box methods represent the inner-loop, f , as a
θ
sequence model to process data for learning. Learning in the inner-loop
occurs solely in the activations of this sequence model, a phenomenon
sometimes called in-context learning. Meta-learning f is a way to
θ
explicitly elicit the phenomenon of in-context learning in a sequence
model. In principle, black-box methods can learn any arbitrary learning
procedure, since they represent f with a neural network as a universal
θ
function approximator. This places fewer constraints on the function f
θ
than with a PPG method. Since f represents an arbitrary function of
θ
history,themodifiedpolicycanrepresentanarbitraryhistory-dependent
policy. As discussed in Section 2, such a policy is sufficient for learning
an optimal policy for a POMDP, and thus for the meta-RL problem as
well. Recall the RL2 algorithm (Duan et al., 2016b) from Section 2.4.
3.2. Black Box Methods 261
In this case, f is represented by a recurrent neural network, whose
θ
outputs are an input vector to the base policy. While the use of a
recurrent network to output a context vector is common, black box
methodsmayalsostructurethebasepolicyandinner-loopinotherways.
In this section we survey black box methods. We begin by discussing
architectures that are designed for different amounts of diversity in
the task distribution. Each of these architectures has different adapted
policy parameters. Then, we discuss distinct ways to structure the
inner-loop and alternative outer-loop algorithms. Finally, we conclude
with a discussion of the trade-offs associated with black box methods.
Adapted policy parameters On one hand, some task distributions
may require little adaptation for each task, as discussed in Section 3.1.
For example, if a navigation task varies only by goal location, then it
may be that not many policy parameters need to be adapted. Many
black box methods have been applied to such task distributions (Wang
et al., 2016;Humpliket al.,2019; Zintgrafet al., 2020).In such asetting,
it is sufficient to only adapt a vector, used as an input to the base policy,
instead of all parameters of the base policy (Duan et al., 2016b; Wang
et al., 2016; Zintgraf et al., 2019; Humplik et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al.,
2020; Fakoor et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). This vector, ϕ, is called a
context vector, just as in PPG methods. This distinction is visualized
in Figure 3.1. The context is produced by a recurrent neural network,
or any other network that conditions on history, such as a transformer
or memory-augmented network. Using a recurrent neural network, the
inner-loop can be written f (D) = rnn (D). As discussed in Section 2.3,
θ θ
when f is represented as a sequence model, f and π (a|s) can be
θ θ f (D)
θ
viewed together as a single history-dependent policy, π (a|s,D). Using
θ
ϕ to represent the RNN hidden state, we can write the recurrent policy
as π (a|s,ϕ). This is a common architecture for few-shot adaptation
θ
methods (Duan et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2016; Humplik et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2020; Fakoor et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021).
On the other hand, some task distributions may require significant
differences in behavior between the optimal policies. By conditioning
a policy on a context vector, all of the weights and biases of π must
generalizebetweenalltasks.However,whensignificantlydistinctpolicies
262 Few-shot Meta-RL
are required for different tasks, forcing base policy parameters to be
shared may impede adaptation (Beck et al., 2022). Alternatively, just
as in PPG methods, there may be no context vector, but the inner-loop
mayadapttheweightsandbiasesofthebasepolicy,directly(Becket al.,
2022). The weights and biases here are the task parameters, ϕ, output
by the inner-loop. The inner-loop may produce all of the parameters
of a feed-forward base policy (Beck et al., 2022), or may modulate the
weights of a recurrent base learner (Flennerhag et al., 2020). In these
cases, using one network to map all data in the trial, D , to weights
j
and biases of another network defines a hypernetwork (Ha et al., 2017).
The architecture can be written as π (a|s), where ϕ = h (rnn (D)), h
ϕ θ θ
is a hypernetwork, and ϕ are the weights and biases of the policy. See
Figure 3.4 for an illustration.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of black box meta-RL with hypernetwork (left) and with a
contextvector(right).Whentheinner-loopisarecurrentneuralnetwork,generating
all the parameters of the policy, including its weights and biases, results in a
hypernetwork. Alternatively, the RNN can output a context vector on which the
policy is conditioned.
Inner-loop representation While many black box methods simply
use recurrent neural networks as the inner-loop representation (Heess
et al., 2015; Duan et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2016; Fakoor et al., 2020),
alternative representations have also been investigated. Some of these
representations are biologically inspired (Bellec et al., 2018; Miconi et
al., 2018). One of the most common biologically inspired representations
3.2. Black Box Methods 263
leverages Hebbian learning (Miconi et al., 2018; Miconi et al., 2019;
Najarro and Risi, 2020; Chalvidal et al., 2022; Rohani et al., 2022).
Hebbian learning (Hebb, 1949) is a biologically inspired method in
which weight updates are a function of the associated activations in the
previous and next layers. The update to the weight (wk ) from the ith
i,j
activation in layer k (xk), to the jth activation in layer k +1 (xk+1)
i j
generally has the form
wk := wk +α(axkxk+1+bxk +cxk+1+d),
i,j i,j i j i j
whereαisalearningrateandα,a,b,c,dareallmeta-learnedparameters
of the inner-loop learned in θ. While Hebbian learning is one of the most
common biologically inspired representations, most methods aligned
with recent machine learning literature use some form of attention
(Graves et al., 2014; Vaswani et al., 2017) to parameterize the inner-
loop (Oh et al., 2016; Ritter et al., 2018b; Mishra et al., 2018; Fortunato
et al., 2019; Ritter et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Emukpere et al., 2021;
Melo, 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Team et al., 2023; Elawady et al., 2024).
Attention can be thought of as a soft form of a key-value lookup
in a dictionary. Specifically, it is a mechanism for combining different
vectors based on the similarity of their associated key vectors to a given
query vector. Given a query vector, q, a matrix, V, where each row is
one of n value vectors over which to attend, and a matrix K, where
each row is one of n key vectors, then attention can be written
i=n
Attention(q,K,V) = X w (q,K )V
i i i
i=0
where w ∈ ∆n is a weight vector defining the convex combination of
value vectors (Graves et al., 2014). Generally, attention computes the
weights as w = softmax(Kq), leading to an attention mechanism that
simplifies to
Attention(q,K,V) = VTsoftmax(Kq) = (softmax(qTKT)V)T.
Additionally, computing multiple queries, with each as a row vector in
Q, we can write this as
Attention(Q,K,V) = softmax(QKT)V.
264 Few-shot Meta-RL
Some methods combine attention with convolution (Mishra et al.,
2018), or use attention over past recurrent states (Ritter et al., 2018b;
Fortunato et al., 2019; Team et al., 2023; Oh et al., 2016), while others
use self-attention alone (Ritter et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Team
et al., 2023). For example, to attend to past recurrent states, q may
be a function of the current hidden state of a recurrent network, while
K and V may be (two different linear projections of) all prior hidden
states computed over D. A generalization of such methods can be seen
in Figure 3.5. In contrast, self-attention models Q, K, and V all as
linear projections of the inputs in D first, then as linear projections of
the previous attention layer, for multiple attention layers in a row.
softmax
... ...
Figure 3.5: Attention over past recurrent states in the inner-loop of black box
methods. One approach is to use the current hidden state as a query in attention
over past recurrent states. The keys (K) and values (V) are all linear projections of
the past recurrent states. The output, ϕ, is a a convex combination of the projected
hidden states (V), where the combination is specified by this weight vector (w),
computed from the similarity between the keys (K) and query (q). Components in
green are optional. In order to provide long-term context to the RNN, the output
fromattentionoverpast hidden states,VTw,canbepassedasan inputtotheRNN
atthenexttimestep.Additionally,theoutput,ϕ,canbeVTw,h,oraconcatenation
of both. Passing the RNN state, h, as an output, with VTw as an input, allows
multiple steps of attention to be integrated into the final output.
3.2. Black Box Methods 265
Attention mechanisms seem to aid in generalization to novel tasks
outside of the distribution, p(M), (Fortunato et al., 2019; Melo, 2022)
and self-attention may be useful for complex planning (Ritter et al.,
2021). Still, attention is computationally expensive: whereas recur-
rent networks use O(1) memory and compute per timestep, attention
generally requires O(t2) memory and compute per timestep t, which
may cross many episodes. While fast approximations of attention exist
(Katharopouloset al.,2020),solutionsinmeta-RLoftensimplymaintain
only memory of a fixed number of the most recent transitions (Mishra
et al., 2018; Fortunato et al., 2019). Nonetheless, both transformers,
which use self-attention, and recurrent neural networks can still struggle
to meta-learn simple inductive biases, particularly for complex task
distributions generated by simple underlying rules in low-dimensional
spaces (Kumar et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2022).
Outer-loop algorithms While many black box methods use on-policy
algorithms in the outer-loop (Duan et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2016;
Zintgraf et al., 2020), it is straightforward to use off-policy algorithms
(Rakelly et al., 2019; Fakoor et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021), which
bring increased sample efficiency to RL. For discrete actions, it is also
straightforward to use Q-learning (Fakoor et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021;
Zhang and Kan, 2022), in which case the inner-loop must change as
well. In this case, the inner-loop estimates Q-values instead of directly
parameterizing a policy. The policy can then act greedily with respect
to these Q-values at meta-test time. This approach can be thought of
as modifying recurrent Q-networks (Hausknecht and Stone, 2015) to
fit the meta-RL setting, which compares favorably compared to other
state-of-the-art meta-RL methods (Fakoor et al., 2020).
Black box trade-offs One key benefit of black box methods is that
they can rapidly alter their policies in response to new information,
whereas PPG methods generally require multiple episodes of experience
to get a sufficiently precise inner-loop gradient estimate. For example,
consider an agent that must learn which objects in a kitchen are hot at
meta-test time. While estimating a policy gradient, a PPG method may
touch a hot stove multiple times before learning not to. In contrast, a
266 Few-shot Meta-RL
black box method may produce an adaptation procedure that never
touchesahotsurfacemorethanonce.Blackboxmethodscanlearnsuch
responsive adaptation procedures because they represent the inner-loop
as an arbitrary function that maps from the cumulative task experience
to the next action.
However, black-box methods also present a trade-off. While black-
box methods can tightly fit their assumptions about adaptation to a
narrow distribution of data, p(M), increasing specialization, they often
struggle to generalize outside of p(M) (Wang et al., 2016; Finn and
Levine, 2018; Fortunato et al., 2019; Xiong et al., 2021). Consider the
robot chef: while it may learn to not touch hot surfaces, it is unlikely
a black box robot chef will learn a completely new skill, such as how
to use a stove, if it has never seen a stove during meta-training. In
contrast, a PPG method could still learn such a skill at meta-test time
with sufficient data. While there have been efforts to both broaden
the set of meta-training tasks and manually add inductive biases to
black-box methods for generalization, which we discuss in Section 4,
whether to use a black-box method or PPG method generally depends
on the amount of generalization and specialization in the problem to
be solved.
Additionally, there exist trade-offs in outer-loop optimization chal-
lenges between PPG and black box methods. On one hand, as discussed
in Section 3.1, PPG methods often estimate a meta-gradient, which
is difficult to compute (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018a), especially for long
horizons (Wu et al., 2018). On the other hand, black box methods do
not have the structure of optimization methods build into them, so they
can be harder to train from scratch, and have associated outer-loop
optimization challenges even for short horizons. Black box methods
generally make use of recurrent neural networks, which can suffer from
vanishing and exploding gradients (Pascanu et al., 2013). Moreover,
the optimization of recurrent neural networks can be especially difficult
in reinforcement learning (Beck et al., 2020), while transformers can
be even more problematic to train (Parisotto et al., 2020; Melo, 2022).
While large transformers have shown some notable success in meta-RL,
such solutions require the use of curriculum learning and distillation
to train stably (Team et al., 2023). Thus, the rapid updates of black
3.3. Task Inference Methods 267
box methods in meta-RL, while enabling fast learning, also present
challenges for meta-learning.
Some methods use both PPG and black-box components (Vuorio
et al., 2019; Xiong et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2022a). In particular, even
when training a fully black-box method, the policy or inner-loop can
be fine-tuned with policy gradients at meta-test time (Lan et al., 2019;
Xiong et al., 2021; Imagawa et al., 2022).
3.3 Task Inference Methods
Closely related to black box methods are task inference methods, which
often share the same parameterization as black box methods and thus
can be considered a subset of them. However, parameterizations of the
inner-loop may be specific to task inference methods (Rakelly et al.,
2019; Korshunova et al., 2020; Zintgraf et al., 2020), which generally
train the inner-loop to perform a different function by optimizing a
different objective.
Task inference methods generally aim to identify the MDP, or task,
to which the agent must adapt, in the inner-loop. In meta-RL, the agent
must repeatedly adapt to an unknown MDP whose representation is
not given as input to the inner-loop. While the agent ultimately acts to
maximize reward, the entire purpose of the inner-loop can be described
asidentifyingthetask.Theagent’sbeliefaboutwhatitshoulddocanbe
represented as a distribution over tasks. As discussed in Section 2, this
posterior distribution constitutes a sufficient statistic, or information
state (Subramanian et al., 2022), for the meta-RL problem. Since we
already know the form of this sufficient statistic, the inner-loop can
model it directly, instead of learning a mapping from history to action
end-to-end. Task inference is the process of inferring this posterior
distribution over tasks, conditional on what the agent has seen so far.
Consider the case where the agent has uniquely identified the task.
Then, at this point, the agent knows the MDP and could in fact use
classical planning techniques, such as value iteration, to compute the
optimal policy directly. In this scenario, no further learning or data
collection is required. More practically, if the task distribution is rea-
sonably small and finite, we can avoid even having to explicitly plan,
268 Few-shot Meta-RL
by learning a mapping from the task to the optimal policy directly,
during meta-training. In fact, training a policy over a distribution of
tasks, with the policy conditioned on the true task, can be taken as the
definition of multi-task RL (Yu et al., 2020a). In the multi-task case,
a mapping is learned from a known task to a policy. In meta-RL the
only difference is that the task is not known. Thus task inference can
be seen as an attempt to move a meta-learning problem into the easier
multi-task setting.
When uncertainty remains in the distribution, instead of mapping
a task to a base policy, task inference methods generally map a task
distribution, given the current data, to a base policy. This can be seen
as learning a policy conditioned on a (partially) inferred task. In this
case, learning becomes the process of reducing uncertainty about the
task. The agent must collect data that enables it to identify the task.
That is, the agent mustexplore to reduce uncertainty in the posterior
given by task inference. Task inference is therefore a useful way to
frame exploration, and many task inference methods are framed as tools
for exploration, which we discuss in Section 3.4. Optimally handling
uncertainty in the task distribution is difficult, and is discussed in
Section 3.5.
In this Section we discuss two methods for task inference that use
supervised learning but also require assumptions about the information
availableformeta-training.Wethendiscussalternativemethodswithout
such assumptions, and how the inner-loops are usually represented.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the trade-offs concerning task
inference methods. Table 3.1 summarizes these categories and task
inference methods.
Task inference with privileged information A straightforward method
for inferring the task is to add a supervised loss so that a black box f
θ
predictssomeestimateofthetask,cˆ ,givensomeknownrepresentation
M
ofthetask,c (Humpliket al.,2019).Forexample,arecurrentnetwork
M
may predict the task representation conditional on all data collected
so far. Recall that ϕ, the task parameters, are the adapted policy
parameters output by the inner-loop. Most commonly, ϕ is passed
directly to the policy as an input vector: π (a|s,ϕ). In task inference,
θ
3.3. Task Inference Methods 269
the vector ϕ is generally the predicted task estimate: π (a|s,cˆ ), where
θ M
ϕ = cˆ . For computing the supervised loss, this task representation
M
must be known during meta-training, and so constitutes a form of
privileged information. The representation may, for instance, be a one-
hotrepresentationofataskindex,ifthetaskdistributionisdiscreteand
finite. Or, it may be some parameters defining the MDP. For example,
if kitchens differ in the location of the stove and refrigerator, the task
representation, c , could be a vector of all these coordinates. In this
M
case, f would predict these coordinates. The representation may even
θ
contain sub-tasks and their hierarchies, or human preferences (Ren
et al., 2022b), when such information is known (Sohn et al., 2020; Zhang
and Kan, 2022), or make use of known transition functions to explicitly
approximate a Bayesian posterior over the tasks (Lee et al., 2019).
Commonly, the task-inference objective, denoted here as J , is given
infer
by the maximum likelihood estimate:
J (θ) = E [E [logp (c )]].
infer M D|π θ M
When passing the task to the policy, there are a few important
representation choices. First, instead of conditioning the policy on the
task representation directly, we can pass a representation with more
information about task uncertainty. This can be accomplished, for
instance, by passing to the policy the penultimate layer when predicting
cˆ (Humplik et al., 2019). Then the task parameters, ϕ, passed to
M
the policy, are trained by inferring cˆ , but only after a subsequent
M
linear transformation: cˆ = L (ϕ). This hidden layer may contain
M θ
more information than cˆ , and cˆ can always be computed from it by
M M
the policy. Second, it can be useful to add a stop-gradient to ϕ before
passing it to the policy (Humplik et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2021b), to
prevent conflicting gradients. Finally, when training f with J , as a
θ infer
supervised objective, the dataset D may contain off-policy data without
bias, which may given a particular advantage in the off-policy setting,
as compared to J given by Equation 2.3 (Humplik et al., 2019).
meta
Task inference with multi-task training Some research uses the multi-
task setting to improve task inference with privileged information
(Humplik et al., 2019; Kamienny et al., 2020; Raileanu et al., 2020;
270 Few-shot Meta-RL
Liu et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021). The task representation may contain
little task-specific information (e.g., if it is one-hot representation) or
task-specific information that is irrelevant to the policy (e.g the amount
of oxygen in the kitchen). For example, consider the more concrete
task of navigation to a goal on the perimeter of a circle, as discussed
in Section 1. In this case, if the task representation is one-hot, it may
be useful to instead have access to the (x ,y ) coordinates of the
goal goal
goal. Additionally, if the task representation contains the location of an
additional irrelevant object, (x ,y ,x ,y ), then if may be
goal goal object object
useful to instead have access to a more parsimonious task descriptor,
(x ,y ), that contains the goal location alone. In general, the entire
goal goal
MDP does not need to be uniquely identified. The agent only needs to
identify the variations between MDPs that occur in the task distribu-
tion, p(M). Even more specifically, the agent only needs to identify the
subset of those variations that change the optimal policy.
To address uninformative and irrelevant task information, represen-
tationscanbelearnedbypre-traininginthemulti-tasksetting(Humplik
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021). Let g (c ) be a function that encodes
θ M
the task representation. First an informed policy, πmulti(a|s,g (c )),
θ θ M
can be trained. This is the multi-task phase, and enables the learning of
g . Since this representation, g (c ), is learned end-to-end, it contains
θ θ M
the information relevant for solving the task. For example, g could
θ
transformc from(x ,y ,x ,y )to(x ,y ).Often,an
M goal goal object object goal goal
information bottleneck (Alemi et al., 2017) is used to ensure it contains
only this information (Humplik et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021). After this,
the inner-loop can infer the learned representation, g (c ), from the
θ M
meta-trajectory, which we write as gˆ (D) (see Figure 3.6). For example,
θ
inthecirclenavigationtask,afterlearningthecoordinaterepresentation,
(x ,y ), the inferred gˆ could be represented by the inferred coordi-
goal goal θ
nates, (xˆ ,yˆ ). Alternatively, the informed multi-task RL may be
goal goal
performed concurrently with the meta-RL (Kamienny et al., 2020).
Forexample,theinformedpolicyregularizationalgorithm(IMPORT,
Kamienny et al., 2020) follows the simultaneous-training paradigm. In
this case, the auxiliary inference objective is given by
J (θ) = E [E [(g (c )−gˆ (D))2]].
infer M D|π θ M θ
3.3. Task Inference Methods 271
Figure 3.6: Illustration of normal meta-RL (left), task inference using privileged
information (middle), task inference using multi-task training (right). Solid arrows
represent forward propagation, and dashed arrows represent backpropagation. Task
inference with privileged information uses a true task representation, c, and then
backpropagates that inference to train ϕ. Task inference with multi-task training
learns an encoding of the task, g(c), to maximize the return of an informed policy,
π , then uses inference of this learned encoding to train ϕ.
multi
This inference objective forces the encoding of g and gˆ to look similar.
Whileoptimizingthisobjective,thealgorithmalsooptimizesthenormal
meta-learning objective (see Equation 2.3) but with the policy condi-
tioned on the inferred task representation: π (a|s,gˆ (D)). Additionally,
θ θ
IMPORT simultaneously optimizes the meta-RL objective but with
the multi-task policy conditioned on the learned task representation:
πmulti(a|s,g (c )).
θ θ M
Some task distributions even allow for significant shared behavior
between the informed multi-task agent and the uninformed meta-RL
agent.Thissharingisgenerallypossiblewhenlittleexplorationisneeded
for the meta-RL policy to identify the task. In this case instead of only
inferringtheprivilegedtaskinformation,themeta-RLagentmayimitate
the multi-task agent through distillation (Weihs et al., 2021; Nguyen
et al., 2022), which we cover in Section 3.6, or by direct parameter
sharing of policy layers (Kamienny et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2021). For
instance, in the IMPORT algorithm, π and πmulti share parameters
θ θ
by using the same components of the meta-parameters vector, θ. In
this case, the entire policy is shared, such that π = πmulti. Even when
the multi-task and meta-RL policies are computed sequentially, the
pre-trained multi-task agent may still be used as an initialization for
the meta-RL agent (Beck et al., 2023).
272 Few-shot Meta-RL
In contrast, when task distributions require taking sufficiently many
exploratory actions to identify the task, sharing policies becomes less
feasible. For example, in the circle navigation task, the informed multi-
task policy, with access to the goal, never needs to explore, whereas
the primary behavior of the meta-RL policy is exploration around the
circumference of the circle. If one were to reuse the multi-task policy
conditioned on the inferred goal, π = πmulti(a|s,xˆ ,yˆ ), as the
θ θ goal goal
meta-RL policy, then the inference would not have sufficient data to be
accurate. The initial inferred goal location, for example, may be (0,0),
which is not in the training distribution of the multi-task agent. In this
case, the behavior of the multi-task agent would be undefined. However,
sharing some parameters, simultaneously training the shared policy
on inferred representation (Kamienny et al., 2020), or fine-tuning the
shared policy as an initialization for the meta-RL policy (Beck et al.,
2023), can solve this issue. For example, if training the shared policy
simultaneously with known and inferred goal locations, (x ,y )
goal goal
and (xˆ ,yˆ ), the agent can learn to execute exploratory behavior
goal goal
whenever the inferred task is (0,0), or has high uncertainty in the
posterior distribution. Still, collecting data sufficient for inferring the
task correctly may be difficult. Often, intrinsic rewards are additionally
needed to even be able to collect the data enabling task inference. Such
exploration in task inference methods is discussed in Section 3.4.
Task inference without privileged information Other task inference
methods do not rely on privileged information in the form of the known
task representation. If the algorithm is allowed to know whether two
trajectories where generated by the same task, then one option is to use
this label as a learning signal for the encoder (Fu et al., 2021; Mu et al.,
2022; Choshen and Tamar, 2023; Guo et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2022).
More commonly, the representation can be (a sample from) a latent
variable parameterizing a learned reward function or transition function
(Zhou et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Zintgraf
et al., 2021b; He et al., 2022). These methods use only information
already observable and train f (D) to represent a task distribution,
θ
given trajectories in D.
3.3. Task Inference Methods 273
For example, Zintgraf et al. (2020) propose to learn the task param-
eters, ϕ, as a latent variable parameterizing the reward and transition
function.Inthiscase,thelatentistrainedinaself-supervisedmannerby
reconstructing trajectories. This is accomplished using only observable
information by predicting rewards and next states for each transition,
given each ϕ :
t
HN−1
X
J (θ)=E [E [ logp (D|ϕ )]]
infer M D|π θ t
t=0
HN−1
X X
=E [E [ [logp (s′|s,a,ϕ )+logp (r|s,a,ϕ )]]],
M D|π θ t θ t
t=0 s,a,r,s′∈D
where the inner summation is taken over consecutive transitions, (s,a,r,
s′), in D. An extension of this algorithm has even been proposed with
a hierarchical latent variable to accommodate the additional structure
in distributions of POMDPs (Akuzawa et al., 2021).
Inner-loop representation Generally, task inference is implemented
by adding an additional loss function, and not by any particular meta-
parameterization of f . While task inference methods do not require a
θ
particular meta-parameterization, most implementations use a “black
box,” such as a recurrent neural network (Humplik et al., 2019; Zintgraf
et al., 2020; Kamienny et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Zintgraf et al.,
2021c). Since many task inference methods infer a latent variable, it
is also common for f to explicitly model this distribution using a
θ
variational information bottleneck (Humplik et al., 2019; Rakelly et al.,
2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Zintgraf et al., 2021c).
In this case, the variational distribution defining the latent variable
conditions on D. We write this as q (z|D). This variational distribution
θ
has its own parameters inferred from the dataset, such as a mean,
µ (D), and a covariance matrix diag(σ (D)). First, the task representa-
θ θ
tion is reconstructed, e.g., with a linear projection of samples from q :
θ
cˆ = Lc(z ∼ q ). Then, the inference is trained by maximizing J ,
M θ θ infer
also called the reconstruction loss, over samples from the variational
distribution:
J (θ) = E [E [p (c |cˆ )]],
infer M D|π θ M M
274 Few-shot Meta-RL
along with a KL-Divergence to a prior,
J (θ) = E [E [D(q (z)||p (z)]].
prior M D|π θ θ
Once the task inference is trained, the parameters passed to the
policy, ϕ, must be chosen. One option is to represent ϕ as a projection
of the full distribution of the latent variable, e.g., its mean and variance,
in order to capture uncertainty about the task (Zintgraf et al., 2020;
Imagawa et al., 2022). This can be written π (a|s,Lϕ(µ,σ)), where ϕ =
θ θ
Lϕ(µ,σ). Combining this representation of the latent distribution with
θ
the J for trajectory reconstruction above, we arrive at a canonical
infer
method, variational Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL (VariBAD, Zintgraf et al.,
2021b). This method is depicted in Figure 3.7.
(a) TIwithIB (b) VariBADZintgrafetal.,2021b
IB IB
Figure 3.7: Task inference with an information bottleneck (IB) (a), task inference
with an IB and without privileged information, as in Zintgraf et al. (2021b) (b). In
either case, the parameters of a latent distribution are passed to the policy. When
usingprivilegedinformation,thetaskrepresentation,c,isreconstructedfromsamples
of this distribution; otherwise, the set of trajectories, D, is reconstructed.
Alternatively, it is possible for the policy to condition on samples
from the information bottleneck (i.e., π (a|s,z ∼ q ), where ϕ = z),
θ θ
instead of conditioning on the parameters of the information bottleneck
directly (Rakelly et al., 2019). In this case, the task inference can be
trained entirely from the actor and critic loss given by the meta-learning
objective, rather than a distinct task inference objective. Rakelly et al.
(2019) and Wen et al. (2022) use such probabilistic embeddings for
3.3. Task Inference Methods 275
actor-critic RL, as introduced by the PEARL method (Rakelly et al.,
2019).
Severalmethodsalsomakeuseoftheexchangeability,orpermutation
invariance, of the transitions implied by the Markov property in task
inference (Rakelly et al., 2019; Korshunova et al., 2020; Raileanu et
al., 2020; Imagawa et al., 2022; Beck et al., 2024). PEARL specifically
modelsthetaskdistributionconditionedonD asaproductofindividual
distributions conditioned on each transition in D:
z ∼ q (z|D) ∝ Y q (z|s,a,r,s′).
θ θ
s,a,r,s′∈D
While it is not necessary to model this permutation invariance, standard
sequence models are sensitive to the ordering of their inputs, which
can can be detrimental to learning when the order does not matter
(Beck et al., 2020). For this reason, it may be useful to embed the
structure of permutation invariance into the task inference model as
an inductive bias. Specifically, PEARL uses a product of Gaussians,
q (z|s,a,r,s′) = N(z;µ (s,a,r,s′),diag(σ (s,a,r,s′))), which has a
θ θ θ
simple closed form for the joint mean and covariance. However, other
methods forgo the product entirely, and use more general permutation
invariant representations, such as neural processes (Garnelo et al., 2018;
Wang and Hoof, 2022) and transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Finally, some work uses hypernetworks in the inner-loop (Peng et
al., 2021; Beck et al., 2022; Beck et al., 2023). It is possible to use a
neural network to map an inferred task to base-network weights and
biases: π (a|s) (Beck et al., 2022). In this case, the mapping is a
h
θ
(cˆM)
hypernetwork, and it can be trained end-to-end with the meta-learning
objective. Alternatively, it is also possible to use the weights and biases
of existing experts trained in the multi-task setting as explicit targets
for the hypernetwork. In this case, the using these targets for direct
supervision can be seen as (additionally) training with a task-inference
objective (Peng et al., 2021; Beck et al., 2023). Representing the task as
the weights and biases of the expert polices has only been investigated
as supervision for hypernetworks, but it could, in principle, apply as
a task representation for any task-inference method. Note that even
when the hypernetwork has no direct supervision, it is still possible to
276 Few-shot Meta-RL
make use of pre-training in the multi-task setting. For example, the
meta-learned hypernetwork can be pre-trained in the multi-task setting
(Beck et al., 2023).
Task inference trade-offs Task inference methods present trade-offs
in comparison to other methods. First, we consider the comparison to
PPG methods then we consider the comparison to black box methods.
In comparison to PPG methods, task inference methods impose less
structure on the inner-loop. On the one hand, PPG methods generalize
well to novel tasks because of the additional structure. In the case where
anoveltaskcannotberepresentedusingthetaskrepresentationslearned
during meta-training, task inference methods fail (Rimon et al., 2022),
whereas PPG methods generally adapt to the novel task using a policy
gradient. On the other hand, PPG methods are unlikely to recover an
algorithm as efficient as task inference. For distributions where task
inference is possible, fitting such a method to the task distribution may
enable faster adaptation. If there are not many tasks in the distribution
they are easily inferable from a few consecutive transitions, inferring a
latent task using a task inference method can be more sample efficient
than learning a new policy with a PPG method. This is the trade-off
between generalization and specialization depicted in Figure 3.3.
In comparison to black box methods, task inference methods im-
pose more structure. On the one hand, task inference methods often
add additional supervision through the use of privileged information
(Humplik et al., 2019; Kamienny et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021) or the use
of self-supervision (Zintgraf et al., 2020; Zintgraf et al., 2021c), which
may make meta-training more stable and efficient (Humplik et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2020). This is particularly useful since recurrent policies,
often used in task inference and black box methods, are difficult to
train in RL (Beck et al., 2020). On the other hand, there is evidence
that black-box training can be stabilized in meta-RL with the use of
a hypernetwork architecture and reasonable initialization (Beck et al.,
2023), and training the inner-loop to accomplish any objective that is
not Equation 2.3 may be suboptimal with respect to that meta-RL
objective over the given task distribution. An empirical comparison
between black-box methods and task-inference methods can be seen in
3.4. Exploration and Meta-Exploration 277
Table 3.2: Average return across continuous control environments reproduced from
Zintgraf et al. (2021b) and Beck et al. (2023). We compare the black-box method,
RL2, and task-inference method, VariBAD, with and without hypernetworks. All
methods are evaluated over the training distribution and evaluated after a single
episode for adaptation (0-shot with H = 1). Results are rounded to the nearest
hundred.Weseethatthetask-inferencemethodgenerallyoutperformstheblack-box
method without hypernetworks, but with hypernetworks, the black-box methods
perform equivalently or better. (Note that the Walker environment is excluded from
thistable,sincetheexperimentalsetupsonthatenvironmentdifferbetweenZintgraf
et al. (2021b) and Beck et al. (2023). PPG methods do not compare favorably in
this setting; for PPG comparisons, see Figure 3.2 and Table 3.3.)
Ant-Dir Cheetah-Dir Cheetah-Vel
RL2 1,200 1,200 0
VariBAD 1,300 2,000 0
RL2 with Hypernetwork 1,400 2,400 0
VariBAD with Hypernetwork 1,400 2,200 0
Table 3.2. Beyond comparisons to PPG methods and black box meth-
ods, task inference methods provide some additional advantages. Task
inference methods that model the reward and dynamics can be used to
sample additional (imagined) tasks (Rimon et al., 2022), which can be
seen as a type of model-based meta-RL, discussed later in Section 3.7.
And, as we show in Section 3.4, task inference methods also are useful
for exploration.
3.4 Exploration and Meta-Exploration
Exploration is the process by which an agent collects data for learning.
In standard RL, exploration should work for any MDP and may consist
ofrandomon-policyexploration,epsilon-greedyexploration,ormethods
to find novel states. In meta-RL, this type of exploration still occurs
in the outer-loop, which is called meta-exploration. However, there
additionally exists exploration in the inner-loop, referred to as just
exploration, which is where we begin our discussion. This inner-loop
exploration is specific to the distribution of MDPs, p(M). To enable
sample efficient adaptation, the meta-RL agent uses knowledge about
the task distribution to explore efficiently. For instance, instead of
taking random actions, the robot chef may open every cabinet to learn
278 Few-shot Meta-RL
Table 3.3: Average return across continuous control environments reproduced from
Zintgrafetal.(2021b).Wecomparetheblack-boxmethod,RL2,andE-MAMLStadie
etal.,2018,avariantofthePPGmethod,MAML,designedtoencourageexploration.
Results are rounded to the nearest hundred. (See Zintgraf et al. (2021b) for details.)
RL2 andE-MAMLareevaluatedoverthetrainingdistributionandevaluatedaftera
single episode for adaptation (0-shot with H =1), which favors black-box methods.
Note that even E-MAML after 19 episodes of adaptation (19-shot with H =20) is
stilloutperformedbyblack-boxmethodsonthesedomains.(Forenvironmentswhere
PPG methods are favorable, see the out-of-distribution evaluations in Figure 3.2.)
Ant-Dir Cheetah-Dir Cheetah-Vel Walker
RL2 (H =1) 1,200 1,200 0 300
E-MAML (H =1) 300 0 -200 200
E-MAML (H =20) 300 300 -100 200
about the location of food items and utensils when first entering a new
kitchen. This exploration is targeted and used to provide informative
trajectories in D that enable few-shot adaptation to the MDP within
the task distribution.
Recall that in the few-shot adaptation setting, on each trial, the
agent is placed into a new task and is allowed to interact with it for a
few episodes (i.e., its few shots K), before being evaluated on solving
the task in the next few episodes (i.e., over the H − K episodes in
Equation 2.3). An illustration can be seen in Figure 3.8. Intuitively, the
agent must explore to gather information during the first few shots that
enables it to best solve the task in later episodes. More generally, there
is an exploration-exploitation trade-off, where the agent must balance
taking exploratory actions to learn about the new task (potentially even
beyond the initial few shots) with exploiting what it already knows
to achieve high rewards. It is always optimal to explore in the first K
episodes, since no reward is given to the agent. However, the optimal
amountofexplorationintheremainingH−K shotsdependsonthesize
of the evaluation period H−K: When H−K is large, more exploration
is optimal, as sacrificing short-term rewards to learn a better policy for
higher later returns pays dividends, while when H −K is small, the
agent must exploit more to obtain any reward it can, before time runs
out. In this section, we survey approaches that navigate this trade-off.
Table 3.4 summarizes these categories. As discussed in Section 2, there
3.4. Exploration and Meta-Exploration 279
H episodes
x x x x x
M.D.P. 1
A A A A A
K episodes
Figure 3.8: Illustration of “free” exploration in first K episodes (yellow), followed
by not free exploration (gray), followed by exploitation (white). An agent (A) is
trying to identify how to get to a goal location (X). The agent has K shots, or free
episodes to explore. However, K episodes may not be enough, so in the (K+1)th
episode, the agent is still exploring the map to find the goal, and is penalized for
this. In the remaining two episodes, the agent has learned to navigate to the goal
optimally, once the goal has been found, and no longer needs to explore.
is an optimal solution to this exploration problem that maximizes the
meta-RL objective. In the next section, we discuss a framework that
formalizes making this trade-off optimally.
End-to-end optimization Perhaps the simplest approach is to learn to
explore and exploit end-to-end by directly maximizing the meta-RL ob-
jective (Equation 2.3) as done by black box meta-RL approaches (Duan
et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2018; Stadie et al., 2018;
Boutilier et al., 2020). Approaches in this category implicitly learn to
explore, as they directly optimize the meta-RL objective whose maxi-
mization requires exploration. More specifically, the returns in the later
K −H episodes can only be maximized if the policy appropriately ex-
plores in the first K episodes, so maximizing the meta-RL objective can
yield optimal exploration in principle. However, when more complicated
exploration strategies are required, learning exploration this way can
be extremely sample inefficient. One issue is that learning to exploit
in the later K −H episodes requires already having explored in the
first K episodes, but exploration relies on good exploitation to provide
reward signal (Liu et al., 2021). For example, in the robot chef task, the
robot can only learn to cook (i.e., exploit) when it has already found
280 Few-shot Meta-RL
Table 3.4: Few-shot meta-RL research categorized by exploration method as de-
scribed in Section 3.4. End-to-End methods learn to explore implicitly, by directly
maximizing the meta-RL objective. Posterior sampling maintains a distribution over
possible tasks and acts optimally with respect to samples from this distribution.
Task inference guides exploration in order to enable better inference of the task.
Meta-exploration concerns exploration in the outer-loop.
Sub-topic Papers
End-to-End Stadie et al. (2018), Garcia and Thomas (2019),
Components and Boutilier et al. (2020)
Posterior Guptaet al.(2018b),Rakellyet al.(2019),Kveton
Sampling et al. (2021), and Simchowitz et al. (2021)
Zhou et al. (2019), Gurumurthy et al. (2020),
Task Inference Wang et al. (2020a), Liu et al. (2021), Fu et al.
(2021), and Zhang et al. (2021)
Meta-
Zintgraf et al. (2021c) and Grewal et al. (2021)
Exploration
all of the ingredients, but it is only incentivized to find the ingredients
(i.e., explore) if doing so results in a cooked meal. Hence, it is chal-
lenging to learn to exploit without already having learned to explore
and vice-versa, and consequently, end-to-end methods may struggle
to learn tasks requiring sophisticated exploration in a sample-efficient
manner, compared to methods with more structure, discussed later in
this section.
One method that learns exploration end-to-end also modifies the
reward to encourage exploration. E-RL2 (Stadie et al., 2018) is an
end-to-end method that sets all rewards in the first K episodes to zero
in the outer-loop. While ignoring these rewards does introduce sparsity,
it may be helpful when myopically maximizing an immediate, dense
reward prevents exploration needed for a longer-term reward. In general,
many methods add more structure over end-to-end optimization of the
meta-RL objective in order to solve task distributions that demand
complicated exploration behavior.
Posterior sampling To circumvent the challenge of implicitly learning
to explore, Rakelly et al. (2019) propose to directly explore via posterior
sampling, an extension of Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) to
MDPs. The inner-loop of this method, PEARL, is described in Algo-
3.4. Exploration and Meta-Exploration 281
rithm 3. When the agent is placed in a new task, the general idea is to
maintain a distribution over what the identity of the task is, and then
to iteratively refine this distribution by interacting with the task until it
roughly becomes a point mass on the true identity. Posterior sampling
achieves this by sampling an estimate of the task identity from the
distribution on each episode, and acting as if the estimated task identity
were the true task identity for the episode. Then, the observations from
the episode are used to update the distribution either with black box
methods (Rakelly et al., 2019) or directly via gradient descent (Gupta
et al., 2018b).
Algorithm 3 PEARL Inner-Loop
1: Sample task M ∼ p(M)
2: Initialize empty meta-trajectory D
3: for episode 0,...,H −1 sampled from M do
4: Sample z ∼ q θ (z|D)
5: Roll out π θ (a|s,z) to collect trajectory τ for this episode
6: Update D with episode data, τ
7: end for
Posterior sampling does, however, also have a drawback. First, since
the policy employed is always conditioned on a sampled task, all of the
exploration in such a method is executed by a policy that assumes it
knows the task it is in. This means that the same policy is used for both
exploration and exploitation. This can lead to suboptimal exploration
in terms of Equation 2.3. Consider a robot chef that has to find a stove
along a curved kitchen counter. Optimally exploring, the chef walks
along the perimeter of the counter until it finds the stove. If the chef
must be reset to its initial position, e.g., to charge its battery at the
end of an episode, then the robot resumes exploration where it last left
off. In contrast, a chef using posterior sampling, in each episode, simply
walks to a different point along the counter that it has not yet checked,
repeating this process until it finds the stove.
This comparison is depicted in Figure 3.9. Other methods for explo-
ration in meta-RL exist that add structure to exploration without this
limitation.
282 Few-shot Meta-RL
x x x
Optimal
0-shot
A A A
x x x
Posterior
Sampling
A A A
x x x
Irrelevant
Exploration
A A A
...
Episode 1 Episode 2 Episode 30
Figure3.9:Explorationforarobotchef(green)findingastove(red)alongacircular
counter.Thefirsttworowscompareoptimalexplorationandposteriorsampling.The
third row shows excessive exploration (blue) when irrelevant information is available
in the sampled MDP.
Task inference Another way to avoid the challenges of implicitly
learning to explore is to directly learn to explore using task inference
objectives that encourage exploration (Zhou et al., 2019; Gurumurthy
et al.,2020;Wanget al.,2020a;Liuet al.,2021;Fuet al.,2021;Zhanget
al.,2021).Some,butnotall,taskinferencemethodsmakeuseofsuchan
objective to encourage exploration. Exploration methods that use task
inference generally add an intrinsic reward to gather information that
removes uncertainty from the task distribution. In other words, these
methodstrainthepolicytoexplorestatesthatenablepredictingthetask.
Specifically, these intrinsic rewards generally incentivize improvement
in transition predictions (i.e., in adapting the dynamics and reward
function) (Zhou et al., 2019) or incentivize information gain over the
task distribution (Fu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).
The idea is that recovering the task is sufficient to learn the optimal
policy, and hence achieve high returns in the later episodes. While task
inference rewards may incentivize more exploration than necessary, as
wediscussinthissectioninthecontextinmeta-exploration,therewards
can be annealed so that the policy is ultimately optimized end-to-end
(Zintgraf et al., 2021c).
3.4. Exploration and Meta-Exploration 283
Most of these methods use separate policies for exploration and for
exploitation, particularly when exploration episodes are freely available
(Zhou et al., 2019; Gurumurthy et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Fu et al.,
2021). The intrinsic reward is used to train the exploration policy, while
the standard meta-RL objective given by Equation 2.3 is used to train
the exploitation policy. The exploration policy explores for the first K
episodes, and then the exploitation policy exploits for the remaining
H −K exploitation methods, conditioned on the data collected by the
exploration policy.
One method, DREAM (Liu et al., 2021), first identifies the infor-
mation that is useful to the exploitation policy, and then trains the
exploration policy directly to recover only this information. This is
critical when the number of shots K is too small to exhaustively explore
all of the dynamics and reward function, much of which may be irrele-
vant. For example, exploring the decorations on the wall may provide
information about the task dynamics, but are irrelevant for a robot chef
trying to cook a meal. Learning the task representation in this way can
be seen as multi-task training, as described in the Section 3.3, which
addresses uninformative (e.g., a one-hot encoding), or irrelevant task
information. This multi-task training is particularly beneficial in the
context of exploration since the policy used in the multi-task phase to
learnthetaskrepresentationcanalsobereusedasanexploitationpolicy.
While, the exploration and exploitation policies could be meta-trained
entirely in sequence, in practice they are trained simultaneously for sta-
bility (Liu et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2021). Meta-testing and meta-training
for DREAM are described in Algorithms 4 and 5, respectively. Still,
DREAMhassomedrawbacks.Forinstance,DREAMrequiresprivileged
information in the form of a known task representation, and DREAM
may be suboptimal when it is not possibly to explore sufficiently in the
given K shots (e.g., in a 0-shot setting).
Meta-exploration Finally, in meta-RL, there is still the process of
acquiring data for the outer-loop learning, just as in standard RL. This
is called meta-exploration, since it must explore the space of exploration
strategies. While meta-exploration can be considered exploration in
the outer-loop, both loops share data, and exploration methods may
284 Few-shot Meta-RL
Algorithm 4 DREAM Meta-Testing
1: Sample task M ∼ p(M)
2: Initialize empty meta-trajectory D
3: for each exploration episode k = 0,...,K sampled from M do
4: Roll out exploration policy π θ (a|s,D) to collect trajectory τ
5: Update D with τ
6: end for
7: Infer z ∼ q θ (z|D)
8: for each exploitation episode h = K,...,H−1 sampled from M do
9:
Roll out exploitation policy πmulti(a|s,z)
θ
10: end for
affect both loops, so the distinction may be blurry. Often, sufficient
meta-exploration occurs simply as a result of the exploration of the
standard RL algorithm in the outer-loop. However, a common method
to specifically address meta-exploration is the addition of an intrinsic
reward. In fact, the addition of any task inference reward, discussed in
the previous paragraph, can be considered meta-exploration. This is
particularly apparent when considering that this intrinsic reward can
be used to train a policy exclusively for off-policy data collection during
meta-training. However, sometimes adding a task inference reward is
not enough. In this case, intrinsic rewards can be added that function
similarly to those in standard RL. For example, using random network
distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019), a reward may add an incentive
for novelty (Zintgraf et al., 2021c). In this case, the novelty is measured
in the joint space of the state and task representation, instead of just
in the state representation, as in standard RL. For example, HyperX
(Zintgraf et al., 2021c) adds the reward,
rhyper(ϕ,s) = ||f(ϕ,s)−h(ϕ,s)||,
where ϕ = L (µ,σ) represents a projection of the task distribution, as in
θ
VariBAD; f represents the predictor network in RND; and h represents
the random prior network in RND.
Additionally, an intrinsic reward may add an incentive for getting
data where the task inference has high error and is still not well trained
3.4. Exploration and Meta-Exploration 285
Algorithm 5 DREAM Meta-Training
1: while not done meta-training do
2: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
3: for each task index i = 0,...M do
4:
Initialize meta-parameters, θ, and empty meta-trajectory Di
5: Sample z ∼ g θ (z|c M ), a task embedding with IB
6: for each exploitation episode h = K,...,H −1 do
7: Every other episode, replace true z with inferred zˆ ∼ q θ ,
to make the meta-training task distribution closer to the
meta-test distribution for stability
8:
Roll out exploitation policy πmulti(a|s,z)
θ
9: Update π θ multi and g θ using task reward and prior
10: end for
11: for each exploration episode k = 0,...,K −1 do
12: Roll out exploration policy π θ (a|s,Di) to collect trajectory
τ
13: Update Di with τ
14: Update q θ (z|Di) to infer z using variational inference
15: Compute r t explore ← −||z−zˆ t ||2 2 +||z−z t ˆ −1 ||2 2 −c for constant
c, inferred task zˆ, and all timesteps t
16: Update π θ using exploration reward, r t explore, i.e. the infor-
mation gain in q for each transition
17: end for
18: end for
19: end while
(Zintgraf et al., 2021c), or add an incentive for getting data where
TD-error is high (Grewal et al., 2021). For example, HyperX (Zintgraf
et al., 2021c) adds the reward:
rerror(ϕ,s) = −logp (s′|s,a,ϕ)−logp (r|s,a,ϕ)
θ θ
∝ ||s′−sˆ′||2+||r′−rˆ′||2
2 2
Manyof these rewardsincentivize behaviorthat should not occur attest
time, and in any case, the additional reward changes the optimal policy
as suggested by Equation 2.3. To address this, the reward bonus can be
286 Few-shot Meta-RL
annealed, letting the portion incentivizing meta-exploration go to zero
(Zintgraf et al., 2021c), so that learning is still ultimately optimized
end-to-end, or meta-training could occur off-policy.
3.5 Bayes-adaptive Optimality
Our discussion so far reveals two key intuitions about exploration. First,
exploration reduces the uncertainty about the dynamics and reward
function of the current task. Crucially, it is not optimal to indiscrimi-
nately reduce all uncertainty. Instead, optimal exploration only reduces
uncertainty that increases expected future returns, and does not reduce
uncertainty over distracting or irrelevant parts of the state space. Sec-
ond, there is a tension between exploration and exploitation: gathering
information to decrease uncertainty and increase future returns can
sacrifice more immediate returns. In these cases, it can be worthwhile
for the agent to fall back on behaviors shared across all tasks, instead of
adapting to the task, particularly when time for exploration is limited
(Lange and Sprekeler, 2020). Therefore, maximizing the returns across a
period of time requires carefully balancing information gathering via ex-
ploration and exploiting this information to achieve high returns. These
raise an important question: What is an optimal exploration strategy?
To answer this question, we next introduce the Bayes-adaptive Markov
decision process (Duff and Barto, 2002; Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015), a
special type of MDP whose solution is a Bayes-optimal policy, which
optimally trades off between exploration and exploitation. Then, we
discuss practical methods for learning approximate Bayes-optimal poli-
cies, and analyze the behavior of algorithms introduced in the previous
section from the perspective of Bayes-optimality.
Bayes-adaptive Markov decision processes. Todeterminetheoptimal
exploration strategy, we need a framework to quantify the expected
returns achieved by a policy when placed into an MDP with unknown
dynamics and reward function. From a high level, the Bayes-adaptive
Markov decision process (BAMDP), a special type of MDP, models
exactly this: At each timestep, the BAMDP quantifies the current
uncertainty about an MDP and returns next states and rewards based
3.5. Bayes-adaptive Optimality 287
on what happens in expectation under the uncertainty. Then, the policy
that maximizes returns under the BAMDP maximizes returns when
placed into an unknown MDP. Crucially, the dynamics of the BAMDP
satisfy the Markov property by augmenting the states with the current
uncertainty. In other words, the optimal exploration strategy explicitly
conditions on the current uncertainty to determine when and what to
explore and exploit.
More formally, the BAMDP characterizes the current uncertainty as
a distribution over potential transition dynamics and reward functions
based on the current observations. Intuitively, a peaky distribution that
places most of its mass on only a few similar dynamics and reward
functions encodes low uncertainty, while a flat distribution encodes high
uncertainty, as there are many different dynamics and reward functions
that the agent could be in. Specifically, the belief at the tth timestep
b = p(r,p | τ ) is a posterior over dynamics p and reward functions r
t :t
consistent with the observations τ = (s ,a ,r ,...,s ) so far, and the
:t 0 0 0 t
initial belief b is a prior p(r,p). Then, the states of the BAMDP are
0
hyperstates s+ = (s ,b ) composed of a state s and a belief b , which
t t t t t
effectively augments the state with the current uncertainty. Conditioned
on the hyperstate, the policy can satisfy the Markov property, making
the hyperstate a sufficient statistic of the history seen by the agent.
The hyperstate is a natural sufficient statistic for Meta-RL, both for
its relevance in the BAMDP, and since it corresponds to the belief-
state of the meta-RL POMDP described in Section 2.3. However, other
sufficient statistics for meta-RL exist as well (Choshen and Tamar, 2023;
Subramanian et al., 2022).
As previously mentioned, the transition dynamics and reward func-
tion of the BAMDP are governed by what happens in expectation under
the current uncertainty. Specifically, the BAMDP reward function is
the expected rewards under the current belief:
R+(s ,b ,a ) = E [R(s ,a )].
t t t R∼bt t t
The transition dynamics of the BAMDP are similar. The probability of
ending up at a next state s is the expected probability of ending up
t+1
at that state under the belief, and the next belief is updated according
288 Few-shot Meta-RL
to Bayes rule based on the next state and reward from the underlying
MDP and not the BAMDP:
P+(s ,b | s ,b ,a )
t+1 t+1 t t t
= E [P(s | s ,a )δ(b = p(R,P | τ ))].
R,P∼bt t+1 t t t+1 :t+1
In other words, the BAMDP can be interpreted as interacting with an
unknown MDP and maintaining the current uncertainty (i.e., belief).
Takinganactiona attimesteptyieldsanextstates andrewardr
t t+1 t+1
from the MDP, which are used to update the belief b . The next state
t+1
in the BAMDP is then s+ = (s ,b ), but the BAMDP reward
t+1 t+1 t+1
is the expected reward under the current belief r+ = R+(s ,b ,a ) =
t t t t
E [R(s ,a )].
R∼bt t t
The standard objective on a BAMDP is to maximize the expected
rewards over some horizon of H timesteps:
"H−1 #
J(π) = E X R+(s ,b ,a ) . (3.1)
b0,π t t t
t=0
As H increases, the agent is incentivized to explore more, as there
is more time to reap the benefits of finding higher reward solutions.
Notably, this objective exactly corresponds to the standard meta-RL
objective (Equation 2.3), where the number of shots K is set to 0.
Learning an approximate Bayes-optimal policy Directly computing
Bayes-optimal policies requires planning through hyperstates. As the
hyperstates include beliefs, which are distributions over dynamics and
reward functions, this is generally intractable for all but the simplest
problems. However, there are practical methods for learning approxi-
mately Bayes-optimal policies (Lee et al., 2019; Humplik et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2020; Arumugam and Singh, 2022). The main idea is to
learn to approximate the belief and simultaneously learn a policy condi-
tioned on the belief to maximize the BAMDP objective (Equation 3.1).
As a concrete example, variBAD (Zintgraf et al., 2020) learns to
approximate the belief with variational inference. Since directly main-
tainingadistributionoverdynamicsandrewardfunctionsisgenerallyin-
tractable,variBADrepresentstheapproximatebeliefwithadistribution
3.5. Bayes-adaptive Optimality 289
b = p(m | τ ) over latent variables m. This distribution and the latent
t :t
variablesmcanbelearnedbyrollingoutthepolicytoobtaintrajectories
τ = (s ,a ,r ,...,s ) and maximizing the likelihood of the observed
0 0 0 H
dynamics and rewards p(s ,r ,s ,r ,...,s | a ,...,a ) via the ev-
0 0 1 1 H 0 H−1
idence lower bound. Simultaneously, a policy π(a | s ,b = p(m | τ ))
t t t :t
is learned to maximize returns via standard RL.
Connections with other exploration methods While not all the meth-
odsdescribedinSection3.4aimtolearnBayes-adaptiveoptimalpolicies,
the framework of BAMDPs can still offer a helpful perspective on how
these methods explore. We discuss several examples below.
First, black box meta-RL algorithms such as RL2 learn a recurrent
policythatnotonlyconditionsonthecurrentstates ,butonthehistory
t
of observed states, actions, and rewards τ = (s ,a ,r ,...,s ), which
:t 0 0 0 t
is typically processed through a recurrent neural network to create some
hidden state h at each timestep. Notably, this history is sufficient for
t
computing the belief state b = p(r,p | τ ), and hence black box meta-
t :t
RL algorithms can in principle learn Bayes-adaptive optimal policies by
encoding the belief state in the hidden state h . Indeed, variBAD can
t
be seen as adding an auxiliary loss to a black box meta-RL algorithm
that encourages the hidden state to be predictive of the belief state,
thoughpracticalimplementationsoftheseapproachesdiffer,asvariBAD
typically does not backpropagate through its hidden state, whereas RL2
does. However, in practice, black box meta-RL algorithms may struggle
to efficiently learn Bayes-adaptive optimal policies in domains requiring
exploration that is temporally-extended and qualitatively different from
the exploitation behavior. Learning such sophisticated exploration is
difficult due to challenges in end-to-end optimization.
While Team et al. (2023) demonstrate that is possible to learn
complicated exploration strategies end-to-end, doing so may also require
the use of curriculum learning, distillation, and a large number of
samples for meta-training (Team et al., 2023). Moreover, the meta-
exploration problem in their task distribution may not have presented a
difficult meta-exploration problem as their agent “does not use the trial
conditioning information it observes to adjust its behaviour” (Team et
al., 2023). End-to-end training on the meta-RL objective alone presents
290 Few-shot Meta-RL
a difficult optimization problem. Liu et al. (2021) highlight one such
optimizationchallengeforblackboxmeta-RLalgorithms,wherelearning
to explore and gather information is challenging without already having
learned how to exploit this information, and vice-versa.
Second, many exploration methods discussed in the previous section
consider the few-shot setting, where the agent is given a few “free”
episodes to explore, and the objective is to maximize the returns on the
subsequent episodes. Likewise, the BAMDP objective can be modified
to include free exploration episodes by setting initial rewards to zero.
Depending on the amount of free exploration, the optimal policies for
the BAMDP can encourage fairly different exploration behaviors. For
example, in the robot chef task, the optimal few-shot exploration may
be to first exhaustively look through the drawers and pantry for the
best culinary utensils and ingredients in the initial few shots before
beginning to cook. In contrast, optimal zero-shot behavior may attempt
to locate the utensils and ingredients while cooking (e.g., as a pot of
water boils), as spending the upfront time may be too costly. This may
result in using less suitable utensils or ingredients, though, especially
when optimized at lower discount factors.
Moregenerally,methodsdesignedforthefew-shotsettingattemptto
reduce the uncertainty in the belief state in the initial few free episodes,
and then subsequently exploit the relative low uncertainty to achieve
high returns. This contrasts behavior in the zero-shot setting, which
may involve interleaving exploration and exploitation. For example, the
posteriorsamplingexplorationinPEARLmaintainsaposterioroverthe
current task, which is equivalent to the belief state. Then, exploration
occurs by sampling from this distribution and pretending the sampled
task is the current task, and then updating the posterior based on
the observations, which aims to collapse the belief state’s uncertainty.
Similarly, by learning an exploration policy that gathers all the task-
relevant information during the few free exploration episodes, DREAM
also attempts to collapse the belief state to include only dynamics and
rewards that share the same optimal exploitation policy.
3.6. Supervision 291
3.6 Supervision
In this section, we discuss most of the different types of supervision
considered in meta-RL. In the standard setting discussed so far, the
meta-RL agent receives reward supervision in both the inner- and outer-
loops of meta-training, as well as meta-testing. However, this might not
always be the case. Many variations have been considered, from the
unsupervised case (i.e., complete lack of rewards during meta-training
or testing), to stronger forms of supervision (e.g., access to expert
trajectories or other privileged information during meta-training and/or
testing). Each of these presents a different problem setting, with unique
methods, visualized in Table 3.5. Below, we discuss these settings, from
those with the least supervision to those with the most.
Unsupervised meta-RL The first problem setting provides the least
supervision: no reward information is available at meta-train time, but
it is available at meta-test time (Gupta et al., 2018a; Jabri et al., 2019;
Mutti et al., 2022). For example, a robot chef may be meta-trained in a
standardized kitchen and then sold to customers, who may each have
their own reward functions for the chef. However, the company training
the robot may not know the desires of the customers. In this case, it is
difficult to design the reward functions for the distribution of MDPs
needed for meta-training. It is difficult even to define a distribution
under which we might expect the test tasks to have support. One
solution is simply to create rewards that encourage maximally diverse
trajectories in the environment. Then, it is likely that what an end
user desires is similar to one of these trajectories and reward functions.
Gupta et al. (2018a) and Jabri et al. (2019) attempt to learn a set
of diverse reward functions by rewarding behaviors that are distinct
from one another. In general, a set of tasks can be created using an
off-the-shelf unsupervised RL method (Eysenbach et al., 2019; Park
et al., 2024). After this set of tasks is created, meta-RL can easily be
performed as normal.
For example, Gupta et al. (2018a) use the method Diversity is All
You Need (DIAYN, Eysenbach et al., 2019), to create this distribution
over reward functions. Specifically, DIAYN first learns a latent variable,
292 Few-shot Meta-RL
Table 3.5: Problem settings by supervision available at meta-training and meta-
testingtimeascategorizedinSection3.6.Mostoftheliteratureinfew-shotmeta-RL
considers the problem setting with rewards provided at meta-train and meta-test
time.Therearethreeadditionalvariationsonthissupervisioninmeta-RLaddressed
in this section. Meta-imitation learning is a related but separate problem, briefly
covered in this survey.
Meta-Train Meta-Test Papers
Standard
Rewards Rewards See, e.g., Table 3.1
Meta-RL
Unsupervised Guptaet al.(2018a),Jabriet al.
Unsupervised Rewards
Meta-RL (2019), and Mutti et al. (2022)
Sung et al. (2017), Miconi et al.
(2018), Yang et al. (2019), Yan
et al. (2020), and Najarro and
Meta-RL
Risi (2020)
with Unsu- Rewards Unsupervised
pervised (Sparse) (Sparse)
Sparse: Gupta et al. (2018b),
Meta-Testing
Rakellyet al.(2019),Zhaoet al.
(2021), and Wan et al. (2022)
Mendonca et al. (2019), Weihs
Meta-RL via et al. (2021), Sharaf and
Supervised Rewards
Imitation Daumé III (2021), and Nguyen
et al. (2022)
Zhou et al. (2020), Prat and
Rewards Rewards
Mixed Johns (2021), Dance et al.
and/or and/or
Supervision (2021), and Rengarajan et al.
Supervision Supervision
(2022)
Duan et al. (2017), Finn et al.
(2017b), James et al. (2018), Yu
et al. (2018), Xu et al. (2019),
Meta- Dasari and Gupta (2020),
(Un)-
Imitation Supervised Bonardi et al. (2020), Singh
supervised
Learning et al. (2020), Brown et al.
(2020), Jang et al. (2021), Li
et al. (2021b), and Chowdhery
et al. (2022)
Z, to parameterize the reward function, along with a multi-task policy,
πmulti(a|s,z). DIAYN does so by maximizing the mutual information
between the state and the latent variable, ensuring partitioning of the
states, and the entropy of the policy:
3.6. Supervision 293
J = H(A|S,Z)+I(S,Z),
θ
= H(A|S,Z)+H(Z)−H(Z|S)
In practice, this optimization amounts to using soft actor critic (Haar-
noja et al., 2018) to maximize H(A|S,Z), while setting r(s,z) =
logq (z|s)−logp(z) to maximize the other terms in expectation (Ey-
θ
senbach et al., 2019). Here, q , is a learned discriminator predicting the
θ
probability of the latent variable given the state, and p(z) is a known
latent variable distribution. Note that q can be learned by maximizing
θ
the same objective, J , since optimizing the only term dependent on
θ
q , logq (z|s), corresponds to a maximum likelihood estimate. After
θ θ
learning q (z|s), this discriminator is then reused as a reward function
θ
for meta-RL. Specifically, a separate meta-RL agent (MAML) is trained
over this latent distribution using r(s,z) = logq (z|s).
θ
Once trained, such meta-RL agents can adapt more quickly than RL
from scratch and are competitive, on several navigation and locomotion
tasks, with meta-training over a hand-designed training distribution.
Still,thesedomainsaresimpleenoughthatdiversetrajectoriescoverthe
task space, and a gap remains between these domains and more realistic
domains such as the robot chef. Methods from reward-free RL (Touati
and Ollivier, 2021), are highly relevant here, since they can also make
use of access to the dynamics alone to learn representations. However,
in that setting, the reward function is given to the agent at test-time,
or estimated manually, rather than being inferred by a meta-learned
algorithm.
Meta-RL with unsupervised meta-testing A second setting assumes
rewards are available at meta-train time but none are available at meta-
test time. For example, perhaps the company producing a robot chef
is able to install many expensive sensors in several kitchens in a lab
for meta-training. These sensors detect when a counter is scratched, or
water damage occurs, or furniture is broken. All of these collectively are
used to define the reward function. However, it may be prohibitively
expensive to install these sensors in the house of each customer. In this
case, rewards are not available at meta-test time. Rewards are in the
outer-loop, but they are never used in the inner-loop, and it is assumed
294 Few-shot Meta-RL
that reward information is not needed to identify the tasks. In fact, only
the dynamics vary across tasks in this setting.
In order to learn without rewards at meta-test time, many methods
removerewardsfromtheinner-loopentirely.Whiletheinner-loopcannot
condition on reward, it may learn to maximize reward by maximizing
its correlates. While black box methods are applicable in this setting off
the shelf, assuming other inputs to the inner-loop correlate with reward,
specific methods have been investigated. For example, in PPG normally
the inner-loop requires sampling returns; however, without rewards,
this is not possible at meta-test time. One solution is use a learned
estimate of return, conditional on the data collected so far, to replace
these returns in the policy gradient estimate. Here, the returns can be
replaced with a learned advantage function, A (s ,a ,s ) (Yang et al.,
θ t t t+1
2019) or learned critic Q (s ,a ,D) (Sung et al., 2017). For example,
θ t t
No-Reward Meta Learning (NoRML) modifies the MAML update to
include a learned advantage function (in addition to offset parameters,
ϕ , that allow the meta-learned initialization to focus exclusively on
offset
exploration):
ϕi = ϕ +ϕ +αE A (s ,a ,s )∇ logπ (a |s ).
1 0 offset st,at,st+1∈D
0
i θ t t t+1 ϕ0 ϕ0 t t
Another approach is to leverage manually designed features in a black-
box self-supervised inner-loop, while using a fully supervised outer-loop
(Yan et al., 2020). Finally, yet another approach is to leverage Hebbian
learning (Hebb, 1949), a biologically inspired method for unsupervised
learning in which weight updates are a function of the associated
activations in the previous and next layers. The update to the weight
(wk ) from the ith activation in layer k (xk), to the jth activation in
i,j i
layer k+1 (xk+1) generally has the form
j
wk := wk +α(axkxk+1+bxk +cxk+1+d),
i,j i,j i j i j
whereαisalearningrateandα,a,b,c,dareallmeta-learnedparameters
in θ. Since weight updates only condition on adjacent layer activations,
if no rewards are passed as input to the policy, this function is both
local and unsupervised. Hebbian learning can be applied both to feed-
forward (Najarro and Risi, 2020) and recurrent neural networks (Miconi
et al., 2018; Miconi et al., 2019). Variants of Hebbian learning for
3.6. Supervision 295
meta-RL, which pass rewards as an input to the policy are investigated
by Chalvidal et al. (2022) and Rohani et al. (2022).
Alternatively, instead of having no rewards at meta-test time, we
may have only sparse rewards. If dense rewards are available at meta-
training, standard meta-RL methods can be applied directly by using
the dense rewards in the outer-loop and sparse rewards in the inner-
loop (Gupta et al., 2018b; Rakelly et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2021). In
the case only sparse rewards are available for both meta-training and
meta-testing, one approach is to alter the reward function at meta-
training. A common method for this is a type of experience relabelling
called hindsight task relabelling (Packer et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2022).
Assuming tasks differ only in rewards, trajectories can be relabeled with
rewards from other tasks and still be consistent with the MDP. Training
can proceed by using a standard off-policy meta-RL algorithm (Rakelly
et al.,2019).Thisisparticularlyusefulif,forinstance,thetrajectorydid
not reach a goal state in the original task, but did under the relabeled
task. How to choose such a task is one area of investigation (Wan et al.,
2022). Alternatively, if the dynamics differ, one few-shot method allows
for policies to be explicitly transferred between tasks, when helpful, by
learning to map actions between tasks such that they produce similar
state transitions in each task (Guo et al., 2022). Yet another way of
addressing sparse rewards at meta-test time is by introducing auxiliary
rewards that encourage exploration, as discussed in Section 3.4.
Meta-RLviaimitation Athirdsettingassumesaccesstoexpertdemon-
strations at meta-training time, which provide more supervision than
standard rewards. For example, a robot chef may have access to labeled
supervision provided by human chefs. This setting can increase sample
efficiency and reduce the burden of online data collection. This problem
setting requires access to expert policies or expert data. If experts are
not known in advance, they can be trained, per task. Alternatively, in
the many-shot setting, policies optimized by existing RL algorithms can
providesupervision,inaprocessknownasalgorithmdistillation(Laskin
et al., 2023; Kirsch et al., 2023). In order to improve over the existing
RL algorithm, the learning speed can be increased by subsampling the
demonstration data instead of learning on the full traces of expert data
296 Few-shot Meta-RL
(Kirsch et al., 2023). One method, Guided Meta-Policy Search (GMPS,
Mendonca et al., 2019), proposes to imitate task experts in the outer-
loop. In this case, the outer-loop can make use of supervised learning,
while the inner-loop still learns a reinforcement learning algorithm that
conditions on rewards at meta-test time. They specifically investigate
the use of expert labels for the final policy of a MAML-style algorithm.
If an expert is not available, the simultaneous training of task specific
experts can also result in stable meta-training (Mendonca et al., 2019).
GMPS illustrates meta-RL via imitation. GMPS rolls out an initial
policy to compute a policy gradient for the inner-loop, and then uses
supervised learning in the outer-loop for the adapted policy. The action
labels for the supervised learning are given by expert policies for each
task, which are assumed to be known. Here, the dataset aggregation
entails using trajectories from the adapted policy but with expert
actions labeled by the expert policies. This cloning loss can be written
J (Di ,π ),whereDi istheaggregateddatasetwithexpertactions
BC agg ϕi agg
for the ith ta1sk, π is the policy adapted to the ith task after a single
ϕi
policy-gradient upd1ate, and J is defined as
BC
J (D,π) = E [logπ(a|s)]. (3.2)
BC s,a∼D
This method is described in Algorithm 6.
Meta-RLviaimitationisstillrelativelyunexplored.Thismaybedue
to difficulty in learning the correct supervision for exploratory actions.
Obtaining a meta-RL expert requires knowing how to optimally explore
in a meta-RL problem, which is generally hard to compute (Zintgraf
et al., 2020). Instead of obtaining such a general expert, these papers
often make use of task-specific experts, which can be easily obtained
by standard RL on each task. However, these task-specific experts can
only provide supervision for the post-exploration behavior, e.g., for the
actions taken by the final policy produced by the sequence of inner-loop
adaptations in a MAML-style algorithm. In this case, credit assignment
for the exploration policy may be neglected. Some papers use the same
actions to provide supervision for both uninformed policies that must
explore and informed policies that must exploit (Zhou et al., 2020; Prat
and Johns, 2021); however, in most environments actions are generally
not the same for both exploration and exploitation. To get around
3.6. Supervision 297
Algorithm 6 GMPS Meta-Training
1: Initialize meta-parameters ϕ 0 = θ
2: while not done do
3: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
4:
Initialize outer-loop datasets, Di , with states and actions from
agg
roll-outs of multi-task experts πmulti(a|s,Mi), for each task Mi
5: for each task index, i = 0,...,M do
6: Collect data D 0 i using the initial policy π ϕ0
7: Adapt policy parameters using a policy gradient step: ϕi ←
1
ϕ +α∇ J ˆ (Di,π )
0 ϕ0 RL 0 ϕ0
8: end for
9: Update ϕ 0 using the meta-gradient: ϕ 0 ← ϕ 0 +
β∇ 1 P J (Di ,π )
ϕ0M i BC agg ϕi
1
10:
Update Di by adding states from roll-outs of adapted meta-RL
agg
agents, π , but actions from πmulti, for each task index i
ϕi
1
11: end while
this, the agent can adaptively switch between optimizing the meta-
RL objective end-to-end and cloning the informed multi-task expert
into (Weihs et al., 2021). Additionally, it may be possible to use the
multi-task policy to generate a reward encouraging similar state-action
distributions between the multi-task policy and the meta-RL policy,
particularly in maximum-entropy RL (Nguyen et al., 2022).
Meta-imitation learning A fourth commonly studied problem setting
is meta-imitation learning (meta-IL) (Duan et al., 2017; Finn et al.,
2017b; James et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018; Paine et al., 2018; Seyed
Ghasemipouret al.,2019;Yuet al.,2019;GooandNiekum,2019;Dasari
and Gupta, 2020; Bonardi et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2020; Jang et al.,
2021;Liet al.,2021a;Gaoet al.,2022).Whilemeta-imitationlearningis
technically not meta-RL, because the inner-loop is not an RL algorithm,
it is a closely related problem setting. Although an extensive survey of
meta-IL methods is out of scope for this work, we briefly cover meta-IL
here. This setting assumes access to a fixed set of demonstrations for
each task in the inner-loop. Most methods additionally train the outer-
298 Few-shot Meta-RL
loop through behavioral cloning on fixed data, in a process also called
meta-behavioral cloning (meta-BC). Alternatively, the outer-loop may
also perform inverse RL, which we call meta-IRL (Seyed Ghasemipour
et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020; Hejna III
and Sadigh, 2022). Another approach for using meta-learning for IRL is
totrainsuccessclassifiersviafew-shotlearning(Xieet al.,2018;Liet al.,
2021b). Meta-IRL is generally performed online and so often requires a
simulatedenvironment,incontrasttometa-behavioralcloning.Forboth
BC and IRL, the inner- and outer-loops generally also assume access to
expert-provided actions, but one line of work considers inner-loops that
use only sequences of states visited by an expert, potentially a human,
despite being deployed on robotic system (Finn et al., 2017b; Yu et al.,
2018; Dasari and Gupta, 2020; Bonardi et al., 2020; Jang et al., 2021).
There are many similarities between meta-RL research and meta-IL
research. In meta-IL, there exist analogues to black-box methods (Duan
et al., 2017; James et al., 2018; Dasari and Gupta, 2020; Bonardi et al.,
2020), PPG methods (Finn et al., 2017b; Yu et al., 2018), and task-
inference methods (Jang et al., 2021), as well as sim-to-real methods
(James et al., 2018; Bonardi et al., 2020). For example, to adapt MAML
to meta-BC, the inner-loop and outer-loop are each computed with a
behavioralcloninglossoverofflinedata,insteadofusingpolicygradients.
An adaptation of MAML for meta-BC, similar to Finn et al. (2017b),
is shown in Algorithm 7. Likewise, to adapt RL2 to meta-BC, the RNN
summarizes an offline dataset, instead of online data, while the outer-
loop uses behavioral cloning. An adaptation of RL2 for meta-BC is
shown in Algorithm 8.
Many contemporary papers discuss the meta-IL problem setting
under the name of in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020). In-context
learning generally refers to learning in the activations of a sequence
model, and frequently implies the use of transformers (Raparthy et
al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024). In-context learning is a phenomenon, and
meta-learning is an explicit way to achieve it. Black box methods and
task inference methods can be seen as two ways to learn to elicit in-
context learning. In-context learning can be used both in reference
to in-context IL and in-context RL (Lee et al., 2024). Large language
models in particular, having gained significant traction recently (Devlin
3.6. Supervision 299
Algorithm 7 Meta-Training MAML for Meta-BC
Require: A dataset of expert demonstrations per task index, i,
for adaptation Di , and validation, Di
inner outer
1: Initialize meta-parameters ϕ 0 = θ
2: while not done do
3: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
4: for each task index i = 0,..,M do
Adapt policy parameters using a step of behavioral cloning on
5:
the offline inner-loop data: ϕi ← ϕ +α∇ J (Di ,π )
1 0 ϕ0 BC inner ϕ0
6: end for
7: Update ϕ 0 using the meta-gradient: ϕ 0 ← ϕ 0 +
β∇ 1 P J (Di ,π )
ϕ0M i BC outer ϕi
1
8: end while
Algorithm 8 Meta-Training RL2 for Meta-BC
Require: A dataset of expert demonstrations per task index, i,
for adaptation Di of length T, and validation, Di
inner outer
1: Initialize meta-parameters θ (RNN and other neural network pa-
rameters)
2: while not done do
3: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
4: for each task index i = 0,...,M do
5: Initialize RNN hidden state as ϕ 0
AdapttaskparametersusingRNNonofflineinner-loopdataset:
6:
ϕi ← f (Di )
T θ inner
7: end for
8: Update θ using the meta-BC objective: θ ← θ +
β∇ 1 P J (Di ,π (·|ϕi ))
θM i BC outer θ T
9: end while
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022), perform in-
context learning (Brown et al., 2020), which can be seen as explicit
meta-IL where each prompt is treated as a task. Moreover, these models
are capable of emergent meta-IL, i.e., meta-IL learning that is not
explicitly in the training procedure, where novel datasets are passed
300 Few-shot Meta-RL
in text as a prompt to the model along with a query, e.g., in few-shot
prompting (Chowdhery et al., 2022), which suggests a similar capacity
to be investigated in meta-RL.
Mixed supervision Beyond the most commonly studied settings above,
Zhou et al. (2020), Prat and Johns (2021), Dance et al. (2021), and
Rengarajan et al. (2022) consider a few related, but different settings.
In these settings, there is a phase in which the inner-loop receives a
demonstration, followed by a phase in which the inner-loop performs
trial-and-error reinforcement learning. The demonstration generally
comes from a fixed dataset collected offline, but may additionally be
supplemented by online data from a separate policy trained via meta-IL
on the fixed dataset (Zhou et al., 2020). The demonstration data itself
may (Prat and Johns, 2021) or may not (Dance et al., 2021) provide
supervision (actions and rewards), or a combination of the two (Zhou
et al., 2020). Finally, the agent may use reinforcement learning for
supervision in the outer-loop during the trial-and-error phase (Dance
et al., 2021), it may use imitation learning (Zhou et al., 2020), or it may
use some combination of the two (Prat and Johns, 2021).
3.7 Model-based Meta-RL
So far, most of the algorithms discussed have been model-free, in that
they do not learn a model of the MDP dynamics and reward. Alter-
natively, such models can be learned explicitly, and then be used for
defining a policy via planning or be used for training a policy on the
data generated by the model. Such an approach is called model-based
RL, and can play a helpful role in meta-RL (Harrison et al., 2018;
Sæmundsson et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2019b; Nagabandi et al.,
2019c;Galashovet al.,2019;Mendoncaet al.,2020;Kaushiket al.,2020;
Lin et al., 2020a; Lee et al., 2020b; Perez et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al.,
2021a; Xian et al., 2021; Hiraoka et al., 2021; Seo et al., 2022; Wang and
Van Hoof, 2022; Shin et al., 2022). Model-based meta-RL methods are
summarized in Table 3.6. In this section, we briefly survey model-based
meta-RL methods. We keep the discussion limited for several reasons:
most model-based methods have an analogous model-free method al-
3.7. Model-based Meta-RL 301
Table 3.6: Categories of model-based meta-RL methods from Section 3.7. Many
themesaresimilartothoseinthemodel-freesection,suchastheuseofparameterized
gradientdescentandrecurrentnetworks.Thetophalfofthetableshowskeyconcepts
in the representation of the inner-loop or the model adaptation, while the bottom
half shows what the learned adaptive model is used for.
Sub-topic Papers
Parameterized Nagabandi et al. (2019b), Mendonca et al. (2020),
gradient descent Kaushik et al. (2020), and Co-Reyes et al. (2021a)
Recurrent
Nagabandi et al. (2019b) and Seo et al. (2022)
network
Variational
Sæmundsson et al. (2018) and Perez et al. (2020)
inference
Model-
Nagabandi et al. (2019b), Lee et al. (2020b), and
predictive
Shin et al. (2022)
control
Hiraoka et al. (2021), Rimon et al. (2022), Seo
Additional Data
et al. (2022), and Shin et al. (2022)
Sub-procedure Clavera et al. (2018) and Hiraoka et al. (2021)
ready discussed in Section 3, most trade-offs between model-based and
model-free methods that exist in RL are the same in meta-RL, and
most of the meta-RL literature considers model-free RL.
Manydifferenttypesofmodel-basedmeta-RLhavebeeninvestigated.
In order to adapt the parameters of the model, some model-based meta-
RL papers use gradient descent, as in MAML (Mendonca et al., 2020;
Kaushik et al., 2020; Co-Reyes et al., 2021a; Nagabandi et al., 2019b),
and some use black-box RNNs, as in RL2 (Nagabandi et al., 2019b).
Alternatively, a fixed number of past transitions can be encoded (Lee
et al., 2020b), or variational inference can be used (Sæmundsson et al.,
2018; Perez et al., 2020). Similar themes arise in model-based meta-RL
as in model-free meta-RL, such as the use of hypernetworks (Xian et al.,
2021) and permutation invariance of transitions (Galashov et al., 2019;
Wang and Van Hoof, 2022), as discussed earlier in Sections 3.2 and
3.3. Once the model of the environment is learned, it can be used to
select the best sequence of actions by optimizing the sequence over a
finite horizon. Generally, the first action is taken from this sequence,
then the actions are re-planned. This process can be used to solve
meta-RL with an off-the-shelf planner, and is called model-predictive
302 Few-shot Meta-RL
control (Nagabandi et al., 2019b; Lee et al., 2020b). Alternatively, some
methodsusethemodelsimplyforadditionaldatawhentrainingapolicy
(Hiraoka et al., 2021; Rimon et al., 2022; Seo et al., 2022), some uses
model-based meta-RL as a sub-procedure in a standard RL algorithm to
make learning more sample-efficient (Clavera et al., 2018; Hiraoka et al.,
2021), and others use the adapted parameters from the learned model as
an input to a policy that is then trained using standard RL (Mendonca
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020b; Zintgraf et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021).
However, in the last case there is significant overlap between model-
based meta-RL and task-inference methods because learning to infer
the task often means learning a latent-variable dynamics model. We
discuss task-inference methods with model-free methods in Section 3.3,
due to their otherwise similar assumptions.
A simple method, for example, would learn a black-box environment
model, without a separate planner, and run a standard RL algorithm,
but use the model for additional data in the policy gradient estimation.
The model itself would be trained using a maximum likelihood estimate
of the transition function and reward function over the same trajectories
collectedbythepolicy.Forpseudocodeofsuchamodel,seeAlgorithm9.
Ontopofthis,itisstraightforwardtoconditionthepolicyonparameters
adapted for the transition or reward model, which can also be seen as a
type of task inference method.
Overall, therearetrade-offs between model-freemeta-RL andmodel-
based meta-RL. On one hand, model-based meta-RL methods can be
extremely sample efficient when it is possible to learn an accurate
model (Nagabandi et al., 2019b). Model-based methods may also be
learned off-policy, because the model can be trained using supervised
learning. On the other hand, model-based meta-RL may require the
implementation of additional components, especially for longer-horizon
tasks that require more than an off-the-shelf planner, and can have
lower asymptotic performance (Clavera et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2022).
Finally, in the meta-learning context, model-based RL may confer two
unique advantages. First, when there are too few tasks in the meta-
training distribution, model-based meta-RL can allow for supplemental
(imagined) tasks to be sampled (Rimon et al., 2022). Second, model-
based meta-RL may be easier when an off-the-shelf planner is viable
3.8. Theory of Meta-RL 303
Algorithm 9 Black-Box Model-Based Meta-RL
1: Initialize an empty dataset for the environment model D model
2: Initialize an empty dataset for the policy D policy
3: Initialize meta-parameters, θ m , for the model and meta-parameters,
θ , policy
p
4: while not done do
5: Sample M tasks, M ∼ p(M)
6: for each task index i = 0,...,M do
7: Replace old data in D p i olicy with roll-outs from π ϕ using recur-
rent policy in real environment
8:
Add the same roll-outs to Di
model
9: end for
10: Add roll-outs from π ϕ in simulated environment model to D policy ,
optionally starting from real trajectories
11: Update policy θ p using the meta-RL objective:
θ ← θ +β∇ 1 P J ˆ (Di ,π (·|ϕ))
p p θpM i RL policy θp
12: Update model θ m using the supervised objective:
θ ← θ + β∇ 1 P E logp (s′|s,a,ϕ) +
m m θmM i s,a,r,s′,ϕ∼Di θm
logp (r|s,a,ϕ)) model
θm
13: end while
and complicated exploration policies are necessary. In model-free meta-
RL, the meta-learning needs to learn what data to collect and how.
However, in model-based RL, the exploration may be offloaded to a
planning algorithm. It may be easier to allow the planner to deal with
complicated exploration in the inner-loop rather than learn this directly.
3.8 Theory of Meta-RL
The theory of meta-RL aims to understand and formalize the principles
governing the learning of RL algorithms. As meta-RL is a relatively new
area, its theoretical exploration is closely informed by insights from the
related areas of meta-SL and multi-task representation learning for RL.
However, meta-RL poses additional challenges due to the inner-loop
learning an RL algorithm. For a theoretical understanding of these
304 Few-shot Meta-RL
challenges, many researchers have used the Bayesian framework. This
Section integrates central insights from the theory of meta-SL and
representation learning and overviews specific theoretical developments
within meta-RL. The papers discussed in this section are summarized
in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Categories of theory papers from Section 3.8. Papers relating to theory
of meta-SL and representation learning for RL are included in addition to pure
meta-RL theory papers.
Area Papers
Baxter (2000), Finn et al. (2019), Khodak et al.
Meta-SL (2019), Denevi et al. (2019), Tripuraneni et al.
(2021), and Collins et al. (2022)
Multi-task
Jinet al.(2020),Huet al.(2021),andChenget al.
Representation Learning
(2022)
for RL
Simchowitz et al. (2021), Tamar et al. (2022),
Meta-RL Rimon et al. (2022), Chen et al. (2022), and Ye
et al. (2023)
Insights from supervised meta-learning Meta-learning, both meta-
RL and meta-SL, focus on designing algorithms capable of efficiently
learning new tasks from a given task distribution. A key aspect of
this learning process is the development of representations or inductive
biases that generalize across tasks. As an early theoretical contribution,
Baxter (2000) laid the groundwork by studying the learning of inductive
biases in a PAC (probably approximately correct, Valiant, 1984) setting,
where the learner operates on a family related tasks and the goal is to
find a hypothesis space that is appropriate for all of the tasks in the
family. More recently, Tripuraneni et al. (2021) provide a fundamental
result on how features learned across tasks improve the efficiency of
learning in a new task. A related result specialized to MAML (Finn
et al., 2017a) is shown by Collins et al. (2022). MAML is further studied
in the online convex optimization framework by Finn et al. (2019),
Khodak et al. (2019), and Denevi et al. (2019), who assume a notion
of task similarity under which all tasks are close to a single fixed point
in the parameter space for which guarantees can be provided. These
3.8. Theory of Meta-RL 305
findings, while not directly addressing meta-RL, offer valuable insights
into the representation learning aspect crucial for meta-RL algorithms.
Multi-task representation learning for RL Multi-task representation
learningforRLiscloselyrelatedtometa-RLinthatitconsiderslearning
a shared representation across a set of tasks. However, in representation
learning, learning an exploration strategy or more generally learning a
learningalgorithmarenotconsidered.Nevertheless,thesettingsareclose
enoughthatthetheoreticalresultsformulti-taskrepresentationlearning
can provide helpful guidance for developing a theoretical understanding
of meta-RL.
Yang et al. (2020) and Hu et al. (2021) consider representation learn-
ing in linear MDPs. They show regret bounds across the set of parallel
tasks that improve as the number of related tasks in the set increases.
Additionally, Cheng et al. (2022) reveal that multitask representation
learning in low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2020) can significantly
enhance sample efficiency when the total number of tasks surpasses a
certain threshold. Their findings emphasize the efficiency of employing
learned representations in downstream tasks, thereby illustrating the
tangible benefits of multi-task representation learning in reinforcement
learning.
Meta-RL specific theoretical advances While research specifically
investigating the theory of meta-RL is limited, some important results
have been obtained. In particular, results relating to the generalization
bounds of meta-RL algorithms offer a principled motivation on the
division of meta-RL methods into few-shot and many-shot methods
introduced in Section 2.
Simchowitz et al. (2021), Tamar et al. (2022), and Rimon et al.
(2022) focus on generalization in meta-RL. Tamar et al. (2022) provide
PACboundsonthenumberoftrainingtasksrequiredforlearninganap-
proximately Bayes-optimal policy, i.e., a policy that optimizes Equation
2.3. Rimon et al. (2022) show that the bound depends exponentially
on the degrees of freedom of the task distribution p(M). These results
give a principled explanation of why meta-RL methods work well for
306 Few-shot Meta-RL
narrow task distributions but not for broader ones. Whereas Tamar
et al. (2022) and Rimon et al. (2022) focus on in-distribution generaliza-
tion, Simchowitz et al. (2021) study the problem of out-of-distribution
generalization by considering misspecified priors for Thompson sam-
pling algorithms, which are often considered in meta-RL (Rakelly et al.,
2019).
Continuing from the Bayesian perspective, Chen et al. (2022) bound
the regret of the Bayes-optimal policy compared to the optimal policy
on any MDP instance possible under the prior. While Chen et al. (2022)
focusontheworst-caseregret,Yeetal.(2023)boundtheexpectedregret.
Furthermore, they propose a pre-training and fine-tuning algorithm
based on policy elimination that achieves favorable regret.
Finally, there are ongoing theoretical investigations targeted at
MAML-like methods (Finn et al., 2017a). Fallah et al. (2021) derive
the sample complexity of a variant of the MAML algorithm. Liu et al.
(2022b) and Tang (2022) investigate the bias and variance of gradient
estimators for MAML and the latter propose a new gradient estimator
with a favorable bias-variance trade-off.
4
Many-shot Meta-RL
In this section, we consider the many-shot setting where we want to, for
example,learnalossfunctionthatisappliedonnewtasksforthousands
of updates, rather than just a handful. In other words, the goal is to
learn a general purpose RL algorithm, similar to those currently used in
practice. This setting is discussed separately from the few-shot setting
presentedinSection3becauseinpracticeitconsidersdifferentproblems
and methods, even though increasing the trial length does not change
the setting in principle. On one hand, a prototypical few-shot meta-RL
problem is goal navigation in MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al.,
2012). In this scenario, the agent adapts to the different rewards defined
by the goal but operates within the same environment. On the other
hand, a typical task in many-shot meta-RL might involve learning an
objective function for a policy-gradient method for Atari (Bellemare
et al., 2013) games.
Inthefew-shotmulti-tasksetting,anadaptivepolicycansuccessfully
solve unseen tasks in a small number of episodes by making use of a
systematic exploration strategy that exploits its knowledge of the task
distribution. This strategy works well for narrow task distributions,
e.g., changing the goal location in a navigation task. For more complex
307
308 Many-shot Meta-RL
task distributions with more tenuous relationships between the tasks,
the few-shot methods tend to not work as well (Rimon et al., 2022;
Mendonca et al., 2020). Rimon et al. (2022) studies the complexity of
meta-RL in terms of the degrees of freedom of the task distribution. See
Section 3.8 for more details. Meta-RL methods designed for these more
complicated conditions often resemble standard RL algorithms, which
are in principle capable of solving any task given enough interactions.
The drawback of standard RL algorithms is that they require many
samples to solve tasks. The meta-RL algorithms building on them aim
to improve the sample efficiency by explicitly optimizing for a faster
algorithm. This algorithm template is illustrated in Figure 4.1. We label
this setting multi-task many-shot meta-RL and discuss it further in
Section 4.1.
H, Large
Jθ φi+1 = φi + α∇φi Jθ
...
MDP 1 πφi NNθ φi MDP 1 πφi+1
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1 S0 S1 S2 S0 S1
Episode Episode Episode Episode
Figure 4.1: In many-shot meta-RL, the meta-parameters θ often parametrize a
policy gradient objective function J used for updating the parameters of the policy
θ
in the inner-loop ϕ. In this pattern, the inner-loop builds on the inductive bias of
a policy gradient algorithm, which helps improve policies over long trials (large H.
The meta-parameters are updated after a number of inner-loop updates, which may
or may not correspond to the trial length depending on specific setting and the
algorithm.
Another area where building on standard RL algorithms is helpful is
many-shot single-task meta-RL.Insteadofseekinggreatergeneralization
across complex task distributions, here the aim is to accelerate learning
on a single hard task. Solving hard tasks requires many samples and
leaves room for meta-learning to improve sample efficiency during the
trial. We discuss this setting in Section 4.2. While the task distributions
in the multi-task and single-task many-shot meta-RL problems are
very different, we discuss the methods for both of them together in
Section 4.3 due to the similarity of algorithms used in the settings.
4.1. Multi-task Many-shot Meta-RL 309
There is less research on the many-shot meta-RL setting compared
to its few-shot counterpart. We believe this disparity is in large part due
to the higher computational demands that follow from the very nature
of the many-shot meta-RL setting, placing it beyond the reach of many
academic groups. Furthermore, optimization in the many-shot setting is
challenging due to high inner-loop computational costs, which limit the
kinds of inner-loops that can be efficiently trained. For example, RL2
could technically be used in the many-shot setting, but optimizing an
RNN over millions of timesteps is beyond the current state of the art.
These challenges are open problems in the many-shot meta-RL setting,
and are discussed further in Section 6.
4.1 Multi-task Many-shot Meta-RL
Many methods in this category are explicitly motivated by the desire to
learn RL algorithms that learn quickly on any new task. This requires
either a training task distribution that has support for all tasks of
interest, or alternatively adaptation to tasks outside the training task
distribution.
The objective for the many-shot multi-task setting is the same as in
the few-shot setting and is given by Equation 2.3. The differences are
the much longer length of the trial H and the broader task distribution,
which may include differing action and observation spaces between
the tasks. There is no strict cutoff separating long and short trial
lengths but the algorithms targeting each setting are generally easy
to distinguish. On common benchmarks, such as MuJoCo (Todorov
et al., 2012), algorithms targeting the few-shot setting reach maximum
performance usually after at most tens of episodes, while algorithms for
the many-shot setting are tested on benchmarks like Atari (Bellemare
et al., 2013) may take tens of thousands or more episodes to converge. In
termsofenvironmentsteps,theinner-loopmayrequiretensofthousands
to tens of millions of interactions, depending on the environment (Oh et
al., 2020; Meier and Mujika, 2022). For the outer-loop to converge, this
can require up to ten billion environment steps in total (Oh et al., 2020;
Jackson et al., 2023). As in the few-shot setting, both meta-training
and meta-testing consist of sampling tasks from a task distribution and
running the inner-loop for H episodes.
310 Many-shot Meta-RL
In practice, since a single trial consists of many inner-loop updates,
optimizing the meta-parameters over full trials can be challenging. Run-
ning a complete trial in the inner loop requires substantial computation
by itself, which can make the meta-parameter updates too expensive to
compute. Furthermore, even if it is feasible to sample full trials for each
meta-parameter update, computing such updates may not be possible
due to memory requirements or optimization problems like vanishing
and exploding gradients.
For example, backpropagating through an agent’s entire lifetime
necessitates storing all intermediate computations from each inner-
loop update, leading to memory usage that grows linearly with the
number of updates. In practice, this means that even processing a
single batch can exhaust the memory capacity of standard devices like
GPUs. Additionally, computing meta-gradients involves higher-order
derivatives, increasing the computational complexity and often making
it quadratic in the number of parameters.
Instead, the meta-learner is commonly updated to maximize a
surrogateobjective:theperformanceofthepolicyafterasmallnumberof
inner-loop updates starting from the current parameters. This surrogate
objective is a biased estimator of the policy performance at the end of
thetrialbutcanstillprovidegainsinpractice.Thebiasfromconsidering
a truncated horizon has been analyzed both in supervised learning (Wu
et al., 2018; Metz et al., 2019; Metz et al., 2021) and meta-RL (Vuorio et
al., 2021). We discuss mitigation strategies for the bias from truncation
in Section 4.3.
A pseudocode template for a many-shot meta-RL algorithm is pro-
vided in Algorithm 10. In the algorithm, the trials may or may not
finish depending on the number of iterations N between each outer-
loop update. Updating the meta-parameters in the middle of a trial
corresponds to the truncated objective described above.
In the multi-task many-shot setting, the meta-parameters are most
commonly parameters of the objective function, which is differentiated
with respect to the policy parameters. This results in a similar algo-
rithm to MAML (Finn et al., 2017a) described in Section 2.4. However,
unlike in MAML, where the initialization of the policy is learned, the
meta-parameters are in the update function, which enables consider-
4.2. Single-task Many-shot Meta-RL 311
Algorithm 10 Many-Shot Meta-Learning for Reinforcement Learning
1: Initialize meta-parameters θ
2: Sample M tasks M ∼ p(M)
3:
Initialize policy parameters ϕi for each task Mi
0
4: Set j ← 0
5: while not done do
6: for N iterations do
7: for each task index i = 0,...,M do
8: Collect data D j i using the policy π ϕi
j
9: Update policy parameters: ϕi j+1 ← ϕi j +α∇ ϕi J θ (D j i,π ϕi )
j j
10: end for
11: j ← j +1
12: end for
13: Update θ to maximize the returns of the newest policies: θ ←
θ+β∇ 1 P J(Di,π )
θM i j ϕi
j
14: For tasks i for which the trial has concluded, re-initialize the
policy parameters to ϕ , and sample new tasks M ∼ p(M).
0
15: end while
ing arbitrary policy parameterizations in the inner-loop. Furthermore,
while learning the initialization is a general meta-parameterization, the
parametrized update function can be easier to optimize, especially in
the many-shot setting.
4.2 Single-task Many-shot Meta-RL
For some tasks in deep RL, useful training distributions of tasks may
not be available. Moreover, even when they are, the individual tasks
may require too many resources to solve on their own making multi-task
training across them too hard. These tasks have motivated researchers
to look at whether meta-RL can accelerate learning even when the task
distribution consists of a single task, i.e., accelerating learning online
during single-task RL training. Note that this setting is sometimes
additionally referred to as online cross-validation (Sutton, 1992).
312 Many-shot Meta-RL
The goal in the single-task setting is to maximize the final perfor-
mance of the policy after training has completed. The final performance
is given by the meta-RL objective in Equation 2.3 when we choose a
taskdistributionwithonlyasingletask,setthetriallengthH toalarge
number,andchooseK suchthatonlythelastepisodecounts.Compared
to the few-shot multi-task setting, when meta-learning on a single task,
the optimizationcannotwait until the inner-loop training has concluded
and update only then because there is no further learning on which to
use the updated meta-parameters. Therefore, single-task meta-learning
necessarily follows a truncation pattern similar to the one described
in Algorithm 10. In contrast to the many-shot multi-task meta-RL
algorithm described in the pseudocode, in the single-task setting there
is only one task and as a consequence only one set of policy parameters
ϕ . Those parameters are usually never reset. Instead, the inner-loop
j
keeps updating a single set of agent parameters throughout the lifetime
of the agent. Therefore, Algorithm 10 is a fairly good representation of
single-task meta-RL methods when choosing a task distribution with a
single task and setting the trial length to the full length of training.
This meta-learning problem is inherently non-stationary, as the
data distribution changes with the changing policy. The ability of the
meta-learners to react to the non-stationary training conditions for the
policy is often considered a benefit of using meta-learning to accelerate
RL, but the non-stationarity itself results in a challenging meta-learning
problem.
Many of the methods for single-task meta-RL are closely related
to methods for online hyperparameter tuning. Indeed, there is no clear
boundary between single-task meta-RL and online hyperparameter tun-
ing,thoughgenerallyhyperparametersrefertothespecialcasewherethe
meta-parameters θ are low-dimensional, e.g., corresponding to the learn-
ing rate, discount factor, or other hyperparameters of the RL algorithm.
Whilesuchhyperparametersareoftentunedbymeta-RLalgorithms(Xu
et al.,2018;Zahavyet al.,2020),tolimitthescopeofoursurvey,weonly
consider methods that augment the standard RL algorithm in the inner-
loop by introducing meta-learned components that do not have a direct
counterpart in the non-meta-learning case. For a survey of methods for
online hyperparameter tuning, see Parker-Holder et al. (2022).
4.3. Many-shot Meta-RL Methods 313
4.3 Many-shot Meta-RL Methods
Algorithms for many-shot meta-RL aim to improve over the plain RL
algorithms they build upon by introducing meta-learned components.
Thechoiceofmeta-parameterizationdependsontheproblem.Themeta-
parameterizations differ in how much structure they can capture from
the task distribution, which matters in the multi-task case, and what
aspects of the RL problem they address. The meta-parameterization
may tackle problems such as credit assignment, representation learning,
etc. The best choice of meta-parameterization depends on what aspect
of the problem is the primary challenge.
Many of the topics discussed below, such as intrinsic rewards and
hierarchical RL, are active research areas in RL on their own. Most
of the research on these topics does not consider the bi-level structure
present in meta-RL. We provide a concise description of each topic in
general terms but do not to provide details on the bodies of research
outside of their intersection with meta-RL. For learning more about
these topics, we provide references to foundational papers and surveys.
In the following, we discuss the different meta-parameterizations
considered both in the single-task and multi-task settings. A summary
of the methods discussed in this section is presented in Table 4.1, where
the different methods are categorized by task distribution and meta-
parameterization. The empty categories such as single-task meta-RL
for learning hierarchical policies may be promising directions for future
work. We also discuss the different outer-loop algorithms considered for
many-shot meta-RL.
Learning intrinsic rewards TherewardfunctionofanMDPdefinesthe
taskwewanttheagenttosolve.However,thetask-definingrewardsmay
be challenging to learn from because maximizing them may not result
in good exploratory behavior, e.g., when rewards are sparse (Singh
et al., 2009). One approach for making the RL problem easier is to
introduce a new reward function that can guide the agent in learning
how to explore. These additional rewards are called intrinsic motivation
or intrinsic rewards (Aubret et al., 2019). While intrinsic rewards are
often designed manually, recently many-shot meta-RL methods have
314 Many-shot Meta-RL
Table 4.1: Many-shotmeta-RLmethodsdiscussedinSection4.3categorizedbythe
task distribution considered and meta-parameterization.
Meta-
Multi-task Single-task
parameterization
Zheng et al. (2020), Alet
et al. (2020), Veeriah et al.
Zheng et al. (2018) and
Intrinsic rewards (2021), Zou et al. (2021),
Rajendran et al. (2020)
and Meier and Mujika
(2022)
Veeriah et al. (2019), Lin
et al. (2019), Zahavy et al.
Auxiliary tasks
(2020), and Flennerhag
et al. (2021)
Flennerhag et al. (2021),
Hyperparameter Almeida et al. (2021),
functions Luketina et al. (2022), and
Lu et al. (2022a)
Houthooft et al. (2018),
Objective Kirsch et al. (2019), Oh
functions et al. (2020), Bechtle et al. Xu et al. (2020)
directly (2021), and Jackson et al.
(2023)
Chenet al.(2017)andLan
Optimizers
et al. (2023)
Black-box Kirsch et al. (2022a)
been developed to automate their design (Zheng et al., 2018; Rajendran
et al., 2020; Veeriah et al., 2021). One advantage meta-learning has
over hand crafting the rewards is that it may be difficult to design
reward functions that account for changes happening over time, but it
is relatively easy to parameterize the learned rewards as functions of
the entire trajectory seen so far (Zheng et al., 2020; Alet et al., 2020).
Learning an intrinsic reward in the multi-task case can help the agent
learn to explore the new environment more quickly (Zheng et al., 2020;
Alet et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2021). They can also help define skills as
part of a hierarchical policy (Veeriah et al., 2021) or be used as general
reward shaping in the single-task case (Zheng et al., 2018). Beyond
the standard settings, Rajendran et al. (2020) learn intrinsic rewards
for practicing in extrinsic reward-free episodes in-between evaluation
episodes. Finally, Meier and Mujika (2022) present an unsupervised
reward learning approach, which learns complex skills in Atari games.
4.3. Many-shot Meta-RL Methods 315
Learning auxiliary tasks In some RL problems, learning a good rep-
resentation of the observations is a significant challenge for which the
RL objective alone may provide poor supervision. One approach for
better representation learning is introducing auxiliary tasks, defined
as unsupervised or self-supervised objectives optimized alongside the
RL task (Jaderberg et al., 2016). With auxiliary tasks the inner-loop
objective then becomes
J (D,π ) = JRL(D,π )+Jaux(D,π ).
θ ϕ ϕ θ ϕ
When a set of candidate auxiliary tasks is known, the best ones to
use can be chosen by meta-learning the weight associated with each
task, such that only the tasks that improve the outer-loop objective
are assigned high weights (Lin et al., 2019). Even when auxiliary tasks
are not known in advance, meta-learning can be useful. Veeriah et
al. (2019) show that the learned auxiliary tasks can improve sample
efficiency over the base algorithm without auxiliary tasks and over
handcrafted auxiliary tasks. The same approach for auxiliary task
learning is used by Zahavy et al. (2020) and Flennerhag et al. (2021),
who further improve the performance by tuning the hyperparameters
of the inner-loop RL algorithm online. At the time of publication both
achieved the state-of-the-art performance of model-free RL on the Atari
benchmark (Bellemare et al., 2013). For comparison of these methods
with relevant baselines, see Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Median human-normalized scores on the Arcade Learning Environment
benchmark(Bellemareetal.,2013)formany-shotmeta-RLmethodslearningauxiliary
tasks.
Method Score (%)
Flennerhag et al. (2021) 611%
LASER (Not meta-RL) (Schmitt et al., 2020) 431%
Zahavy et al. (2020) 364%
Xu et al. (2018) 287%
IMPALA (Not meta-RL) (Espeholt et al., 2018) 192%
Learning functions that output hyperparameters Methods that learn
functions that output hyperparameters of an inner-loop algorithm strad-
dle the gap between hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning.
316 Many-shot Meta-RL
Flennerhag et al. (2021), Almeida et al. (2021), and Luketina et al.
(2022) learn functions that take as inputs summary statistics of the
inner-loop performance such as rewards and TD-error, and output the
values of hyperparameters such as the λ-coefficient used in estimat-
ing returns. In temporal-difference learning, TD(λ) is an algorithm
that balances bias and variance by using the parameter λ to weight
the contribution of bootstrapped multi-step returns, which introduce
bias, and the Monte Carlo return estimates, which have high variance.
Furthermore, Lu et al. (2022a) show that parameterizing the policy
update size coefficient featured in algorithms such as proximal policy
optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) by a meta-learned function
can be beneficial. The parameters of these functions are themselves
optimized by meta-gradients.
Modifying the RL objective directly Learning intrinsic rewards and
auxiliarytasksshowsthataddingmeta-learnedtermstotheRLobjective
canaccelerateRL.Thesesuccessesraisethequestionwhether,insteadof
adding terms to the objectives, modifying the RL objectives directly via
meta-RL can improve performance. To answer this question, Houthooft
et al. (2018), Oh et al. (2020), and Xu et al. (2020) propose algorithms
that replace the return or advantage estimator in a policy gradient
algorithm with a learned function of the episode
∇ J (D,π ) ∝ X ∇ logπ (a |s )f (D),
ϕ θ ϕ ϕ ϕ t t θ
at,st∈D
where f (D) is some meta-learned function of the trajectory. An alter-
θ
native to replacing the advantage estimator is proposed by Kirsch et al.
(2019) and Bechtle et al. (2021), who consider a deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG)-style (Lillicrap et al., 2016) objective function,
where the critic is learned via meta-RL instead of temporal difference
(TD) learning.
∇ J (D,π ) = X ∇ Q (s ,π (a |s )),
ϕ θ ϕ ϕ θ t ϕ t t
at,st∈D
where Q is the meta-learned critic. Similar inner-loop is proposed
θ
for meta-IL by Yu et al. (2018). These learned RL objectives produce
4.3. Many-shot Meta-RL Methods 317
promising results in both multi-task and single-task meta-RL. In the
multi-task setting, Oh et al. (2020) demonstrate that an objective
functionlearnedonsimpletaskssuchasgridworldcangeneralizetomuch
more complicated tasks such as Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013). Jackson
et al. (2023) improve the generalization of the approach further by
replacing the hand-designed training environments with an automated
environment design component. Whereas in the single-task setting, Xu
et al. (2020) show that the learned objective function can eventually
outperform the standard RL algorithm (IMPALA, Espeholt et al., 2018)
it builds upon.
Learning Optimizers In most learning systems, the optimizer pro-
ducing the parameter updates is manually designed. However, it is
also possible to meta-learn an optimizer. Typically, the inner-loop of
meta-learned optimizers conditions on losses and gradients, and outputs
parameter updates. There has been some success in both many-shot
and few-shot supervised learning to meta-learn the optimizer (Li and
Malik, 2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi and Larochelle, 2017).
Some of these meta-learned optimizers use RL for meta-training (Li and
Malik, 2016), and some deploy on MDPs (Chen et al., 2017). Recently,
a many-shot method has been proposed to meta-train and meta-test on
MDPs,makingitthefirstpropermeta-RLmethodtolearnanoptimizer
(Lan et al., 2023). Since then, Goldie et al. (2024) have improved on this
technique by additionally conditioning their optimizer on RL-specific
heuristics.
Black-box meta-learning In few-shot meta-RL, black-box methods
that use RNNs or other neural networks instead of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) tend to learn faster than the SGD-based alternatives.
Kirsch et al. (2022a) argue that many black-box meta-RL approaches,
e.g., Duan et al. (2016b) and Wang et al. (2016), cannot generalize well
to unseen environments because they can easily overfit to the training
environments. To combat overfitting, they introduce a specialized RNN
architecture, which reuses the same RNN cell multiple times, making
the RNN weights agnostic to the input and output dimensions and
permutations. The proposed method requires longer trials to learn a
318 Many-shot Meta-RL
policy for a new environment, making it a many-shot meta-RL method,
but in return it can generalize to completely unseen environments.
Outer-loop algorithms Regardless of the inner-loop parameterization
chosen, by definition, algorithms for many-shot meta-RL have to meta-
learn over long task-horizons. Directly optimizing over these long task
horizons is challenging because it can result in vanishing or exploding
gradients and has infeasible memory requirements (Sutskever, 2013;
Metz et al., 2021). Instead, as described above, most many-shot meta-
RL algorithms adopt a surrogate objective, which considers only one or
a few update steps in the inner-loop (Zheng et al., 2018; Veeriah et al.,
2019; Kirsch et al., 2019; Rajendran et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020;
Zahavy et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2020; Veeriah et al., 2021; Bechtle et al.,
2021). These algorithms use either A2C (Mnih et al., 2016)-style (Zheng
et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2020; Veeriah et al., 2021; Bechtle et al., 2021)
or DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016)-style (Kirsch et al., 2019) actor-critic
objectives in the outer-loop. Flennerhag et al. (2021) present a different
kind of surrogate objective, which bootstraps target parameters for the
inner-loop by computing several updates ahead and then optimizing
its earlier parameters to minimize distance to that later target using a
chosenmetric.Thisallowsoptimizingovermoreinner-loopupdates,and
withtherightchoiceofmetric,itcanbeusedforoptimizingthebehavior
policy in the inner-loop, which is difficult using a standard actor-critic
objective. This surrogate objective has also been used to meta-learning
how to prioritize the task distribution for policy improvement in model-
based methods (Burega et al., 2022).
Alternatively evolution strategies (ES) (Rechenberg, 1971; Wierstra
et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2017), which are black-box optimization
algorithms, are used by Houthooft et al. (2018), Kirsch et al. (2022a),
and Lu et al. (2022a). ES works by sampling a set of parameters
from a distribution, evaluating the set by running the inner-loop, and
updatingtheparametersofthedistribution.Thiscanbeseenasapplying
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) on the parameter distribution. The
generalapproachofusingESintheouter-loopisillustratedinFigure4.2.
ES suffers less from the vanishing and exploding gradients problem and
has more favorable memory requirements at the cost of high variance
4.3. Many-shot Meta-RL Methods 319
Figure 4.2: To estimate an update to the meta-parameters, ES samples a set of
them and computes the inner-loop for each of them independently. This requires
more evaluations of the inner-loop but can work better when the task-horizon is
long.
and sample complexity compared to SGD-based methods (Metz et al.,
2021). Finally, genetic algorithms (Schmidhuber, 1987) and random
search are used by Alet et al. (2020), Co-Reyes et al. (2021b), and
Garau-Luis et al. (2022), who consider discrete parameterizations of
the inner-loop objective.
5
Applications
In many application domains, fast adaptation to unseen situations
during deployment is a critical consideration. By meta-learning on a
set of related task, meta-RL provides a promising solution in these
domains, such as traffic signal control (Zang et al., 2020), building
energy control (Luna Gutierrez and Leonetti, 2020; Grewal et al., 2021),
and automatic code grading in education (Liu et al., 2022c). Meta-RL
has also been used as a subroutine to address non-stationarity in the
sub-field of continual RL (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018b; Nagabandi et al.,
2019c; Riemer et al., 2019; Berseth et al., 2021; Liotet et al., 2022; Woo
et al., 2022). In continual RL, the task, or MDP, can change throughout
the lifetime of an agent. Meta-RL can help by learning how to address
this non-stationarity in the task, given a distribution over sequences of
tasks, simply by allowing the MDP to change to closely related MDPs,
during a single trial. Moreover, curriculum learning and unsupervised
environmentdesign(UED)havebeenusedtoprovidethedistributionof
tasks required for a meta-RL agent (Mehta et al., 2020) or an otherwise
adaptive agent (Dennis et al., 2020). In this section, we consider where
meta-RL has been most widely applied, as well as intersections with
other sub-fields where meta-RL has been used successfully to solve
problems. Specifically, we discuss robotics and multi-agent RL.
320
5.1. Robotics 321
Figure 5.1: Example meta-RL application domains, including building energy
control (Luna Gutierrez and Leonetti, 2020; Grewal et al., 2021), traffic signal
control (Zang et al., 2020), multi-agent RL (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018b; Grover et al.,
2018; Foerster et al., 2018b; Papoudakis and Albrecht, 2020; Charakorn et al., 2021;
Zintgraf et al., 2021a; Kim et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021; Zhang
andChen,2021;Yanget al.,2022;GerstgrasserandParkes,2022;Heet al.,2022;Lu
et al., 2022c), robot manipulation (Yu et al., 2017; Akkaya et al., 2019; Arndt et al.,
2020; Schoettler et al., 2020; Ghadirzadeh et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022b), robot
locomotion (Yu et al., 2017; Schwartzwald and Papanikolopoulos, 2020; Yu et al.,
2020b; Song et al., 2020b; Kumar et al., 2021b; Kumar et al., 2021a), and automatic
code grading in education (Liu et al., 2022c). Image credit to Vázquez-Canteli and
Nagy (2019), Chen et al. (2020), Vázquez-Canteli et al. (2020), Yu et al. (2020a),
Kumar et al. (2021a), Ellis et al. (2022), and Liu et al. (2022c).
5.1 Robotics
One important application domain of meta-RL is robotics, as a robot
needs to quickly adapt to different tasks and environmental conditions
during deployment, such as manipulating objects with different shapes,
carrying loads with different weights, etc. Training a robot from scratch
for each possible deployment task may be unrealistic, as RL training
typicallyrequires millionsof steps,and collectingsuch alarge amount of
dataonphysicalrobotsistime-consuming,andevendangerouswhenthe
robots make mistakes during learning. Meta-RL provides a promising
solution to this challenge by meta-learning inductive biases from a set
of related tasks to enable fast adaptation in a new task.
322 Applications
However, while meta-RL enables efficient adaptation during deploy-
ment, it comes at the expense of sample-inefficient meta-training on
multiple tasks, which is bottlenecked by the cost of collecting an even
larger amount of real-world data for meta-training. Nonetheless, some
methods meta-train in the real world (Nagabandi et al., 2019a; Belkhale
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022b; Walke et al., 2022),
and even learn to manually reset their tasks while doing so (Walke et al.,
2022). However, most methods train a meta-RL agent in simulation
instead of on physical robots, where different tasks can be easily created
bychangingthesimulatorparameters,andthendeploythemeta-trained
robot in the real world. This process, known as sim-to-real transfer
(Zhao et al., 2020), significantly reduces the meta-training cost and is
adopted by most methods that apply meta-RL to robotics (Yu et al.,
2017; Akkaya et al., 2019; Arndt et al., 2020; Cong et al., 2020; Kaushik
et al., 2020; Schoettler et al., 2020; Schwartzwald and Papanikolopoulos,
2020; Song et al., 2020b; Yu et al., 2020b; Ghadirzadeh et al., 2021;
Kumar et al., 2021b; Kumar et al., 2021a; He et al., 2022). We give a
taxonomy of these robotic meta-RL papers in Table 5.1 and introduce
them in more detail below.
Model-free meta-RL methods directly adapt the control policy to
handle unseen situations during deployment, such as locomotion of
legged robots with different hardware (mass, motor voltages, etc.) and
environmental conditions (floor friction, terrain, etc.) (Yu et al., 2017;
Schwartzwald and Papanikolopoulos, 2020; Yu et al., 2020b; Song et al.,
2020b; Kumar et al., 2021b; Kumar et al., 2021a), and manipulation
with different robot arms or variable objects (Yu et al., 2017; Akkaya
et al., 2019; Arndt et al., 2020; Schoettler et al., 2020; Ghadirzadeh
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022b). On one hand, black-box methods
(Akkaya et al., 2019; Schwartzwald and Papanikolopoulos, 2020) (see
Section 3.2) and task-inference methods (Yu et al., 2017; Schoettler
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020b; Kumar et al., 2021b; Kumar et al., 2021a;
He et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022b) (see Section 3.3), when used in
robotics, generally condition the policy on a context vector inferred
from historical data to represent the current task. They mainly differ
in what kind of loss function is used to train the task inference. On
the other hand, model-free PPG methods (see Section 3.1) in robotics
5.1. Robotics 323
Table 5.1: Taxonomy of the meta-RL papers that apply meta-RL to robotics from
Section 5.1. Methods for meta-RL can be directly applied to robotics and robotics
span the range of meta-RL methods. Task-inference and Model-based methods
are common in this section for their sample efficiency. Real-world meta-training is
relatively less common.
Black-box Task-inference PPG
Gaoet al.
Yuet al.(2017), (2019),Arndt
Akkayaet al.
Schoettleret al. et al.(2020),
(2019)and
(2020),Kumar Songet al.
Schwartzwald
Sim-to-real et al.(2021b), (2020b),Yu
andPa-
Kumaret al. et al.(2020b),
Model-free panikolopoulos
(2021a),andHe and
(2020)
et al.(2022) Ghadirzadeh
et al.(2021)
Zhaoet al.
Real-world (2022b),Zhao
meta- - et al.(2021), -
training andWalkeet al.
(2022)
Kaushiket al.
Conget al.
Sim-to-real - (2020)andAnne
(2020)
et al.(2021)
Model-based
Nagabandiet al.
Real-world
(2019a)and
meta- - -
Belkhaleet al.
training
(2021)
(Gao et al., 2019; Arndt et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020b; Ghadirzadeh
et al., 2021) mainly build upon MAML (Finn et al., 2017a). However,
they usually require more rollouts for adaptation compared to model-
free black-box methods, which is consistent with our discussion on the
efficiency of different methods in Section 3. Moreover, instead of directly
using MAML, these methods introduce further modifications to enable
sample-efficient training (Arndt et al., 2020; Ghadirzadeh et al., 2021)
and handle the high noise of the real world (Song et al., 2020b).
Another line of works adopts model-based meta-RL (Section 3.7).
Model-based methods may be more suitable for robotic tasks for the
following reasons: (1) Model-based RL can be more efficient than model-
free methods, a key consideration for robot deployment (Polydoros and
Nalpantidis, 2017). (2) Adapting the dynamics model may be much
easier than adapting the control policy in some cases, such as in tasks
where task difference is defined by various dynamics parameters. Similar
to the model-free case, both black-box methods (Nagabandi et al.,
2019a; Cong et al., 2020; Belkhale et al., 2021) and PPG methods
324 Applications
(Nagabandi et al., 2019a; Kaushik et al., 2020; Anne et al., 2021) have
been considered adapting the dynamics model for model-based control.
(We generally avoid classification of methods as task-inference and
model-based. See Section 3.7.)
While many meta-RL methods can be applied to robotics, the
critical challenges in practice are often different from the conceptual
problems studied in the field as a whole. For example, exploration,
which differentiates meta-RL from supervised meta-learning, is not
generally the most challenging obstacle in meta-RL for robotics. Often,
it is the case that robots must generalize over a distribution over robot
platforms or terrains, which present themselves immediately to the
agent. Instead, the sim-to-real gap, induced by the simulator generally
required for meta-raining, presents a significant hurdle. Some meta-RL
methodsdomitigatetheimpactofsim-to-realtransfer.Forexample,the
task inference algorithm, IMPORT, discussed in Section 3.3, leverages
privileged information in the simulator. A nearly identical algorithm has
been used successfully in robotics sim-to-real transfer in the robotics
literature (Kumar et al., 2021a), despite not being framed as meta-RL
in that context. This phenomenon demonstrates how familiarity with
meta-RL could be of immense use to the field at large in practice in the
future.
5.2 Multi-agent RL
Meta-learning has been applied in multi-agent RL to solve a number
of problems, from learning with whom to communicate (Zhang and
Chen,2021), toautomatingmechanismdesignbylearningagent-specific
reward functions (Yang et al., 2022). Notable problems and solutions
are summarized in Table 5.2. However, in this section we focus on two
main problems that meta-RL can address in the multi-agent setting.
First, we introduce the problems of generalization to unseen agents and
non-stationarity, and discuss how meta-RL can address them in general.
Then, we discuss the types of meta-RL methods that have been used
to address each problem, elaborating on PPG methods that propose
additional mechanisms for each problem.
5.2. Multi-agent RL 325
Table 5.2: Summary of meta-RL papers used for multi-agent RL from Section 5.2.
MethodsusePPG,black-box,andtask-inferenceagents,inadditiontonon-adaptive
agents.Asexamples,theproblemsaddressedincludegeneralizationoverotheragents
policies and non-stationarity induced by other agents.
Sub-topic Papers
PPG meta-gradients for Al-Shedivat et al. (2018b), Foerster et al.
non-stationarity (2018b), and Kim et al. (2021)
Black box for generalization to
Charakorn et al. (2021)
teammates
Black box for generalization to
Lu et al. (2022c)
opponents
Task inference for generalization Grover et al. (2018) and Zintgraf et al.
to teammates (2021a)
Grover et al. (2018), Papoudakis and
Task inference for generalization
Albrecht (2020), and Zintgraf et al.
to opponents
(2021a)
Task inference for generalization
He et al. (2022)
to humans
Thefirstmulti-agentproblemweconsiderisgeneralizationoverother
agents. In multi-agent RL, many agents act in a shared environment.
Often, it is the case that other agents’ policies vary greatly. This creates
a problem of generalization to unseen agents. This generalization may
occur over opponents (Papoudakis and Albrecht, 2020; Lu et al., 2022c),
or over teammates (Charakorn et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021; He et al.,
2022), which is sometimes called ad hoc teamwork (Stone et al., 2010).
The other agents may be learned policies (Zintgraf et al., 2021a) or
even humans (He et al., 2022). By viewing other agents as (part of)
the task, and assuming a distribution of agents available for practice,
meta-RL is directly applicable. This view can lead to the application of
meta-learning methods (Beck et al., 2022; Zintgraf et al., 2020) to the
multi-agent setting (Zintgraf et al., 2021a; Tessera et al., 2024). Using
meta-RL to address generalization over other agents is visualized in
Figure 5.2.
The second multi-agent problem we consider is non-stationarity. In
multi-agent RL, from the perspective of any one agent, all other agents
change as they learn. This means that from one agent’s perspective, if
all of the other agents are modeled as part of the environment, then the
326 Applications
Meta-Training Meta-Testing
Figure 5.2: Illustration of using meta-RL to address generalization over unseen
agents. By generalizing over other agents at meta-train time, we can adapt to new
agents at meta-test time.
environment changes – i.e., the problem is non-stationary (Al-Shedivat
et al., 2018b; Foerster et al., 2018b; Kim et al., 2021). Meta-RL likewise
can address non-stationary by treating other learning agents as (part of)
the task. In this case, the learning algorithm of each agent, and what
eachagenthaslearnedsofar,collectivelydefinesthetask.Byrepeatedly
resetting the other learning agents during meta-training, we can meta-
learn how to handle the changes introduced by the other agents. From
the perspective of the meta-learning agent, the distribution over other
agents remains stationary. This effectively resolves the non-stationarity
of multi-agent RL, which is depicted in Figure 5.3.
Solutions in multi-agent RL make use of all different types of meta-
RL methods: PPG methods (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018b; Foerster et al.,
2018b; Kim et al., 2021), black-box (Charakorn et al., 2021; Lu et al.,
2022c),andtask-inferencemethods(Groveret al.,2018;Papoudakisand
Albrecht, 2020; Zintgraf et al., 2021a; He et al., 2022). These methods
are discussed in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, respectively. The agent may
even use a Markovian (i.e., non-adaptive) policy, if the other agents
are learning (Lu et al., 2022b). Most of these methods can be applied
without modification to the underlying meta-RL problem to address
both generalization over other agents and non-stationarity. In the case
that other agents form the entirety of the task, then the meta-RL
objective can be written:
5.2. Multi-agent RL 327
Non-Stationarity Meta-Learning
Figure 5.3: Illustration of using meta-RL to train over another agent’s learning
in multi-agent RL. By resetting the learning process of other agents, and training
over it, we can learn to address the non-stationarity created by the learning of other
agents.
(cid:20) (cid:20) (cid:12) (cid:21)(cid:21)
J(θ) = E π i ′∼p(π i ′)∀i=0...A E D G(D)(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) π f θ ,π 0 ′...π A ′ , (5.1)
where A is the number of other agents. However, several PPG papers
investigate additional mechanisms for both such generalization and
non-stationarity that we discuss next.
SomePPGpapersfocusonimprovingthedistributionofotheragents
using meta-gradients, in order to improve generalization to new agents.
See Section 3.1 for a discussion of meta-gradient estimation. These
papers focus on the curriculum of opponents to best support learning in
apopulation-basedtrainingsetting.Guptaet al.(2021)iteratesbetween
PPG meta-learning over a distribution of fixed opponents and adding
the best-response to the meta-learned agent back to the population.
Alternatively, Feng et al. (2021) uses meta-gradients or evolutionary
strategiestooptimizeaneuralnetworktoproduceopponentparameters.
The opponent parameters are chosen to maximize the learning agent’s
worst case performance. Both methods use the distribution of agents to
create a robust agent capable of generalizing across many other agents.
Finally, some PPG papers introduce additional mechanisms to han-
dle non-stationarity. In order to resolve all non-stationarity, all other
(adaptive or non-adaptive) agents must repeatedly reset to their ini-
tial policies eventually. While this has been explored (Papoudakis and
Albrecht, 2020; Zintgraf et al., 2021a; Charakorn et al., 2021), PPG
methods tend to allow other agents to continue to learn (Al-Shedivat
328 Applications
et al., 2018b; Foerster et al., 2018b), or even to meta-learn (Kim et
al., 2021), without resetting. Each PPG method addresses the non-
stationary learning of other agents in a different way. For example,
Al-Shedivat et al. (2018b) propose meta-learning how to make gradi-
ent updates such that performance improves against the subsequent
opponent policy, over various pairs of opponent policies. In contrast,
Foerster et al. (2018b) derive a policy gradient update such that one
agent meta-learns assuming the rest follow an exact policy gradient, and
Kim et al. (2021) derive a policy gradient update assuming all agents
sample data for meta-learning.
6
Open Problems
Meta-RL is an active area of research with an increasing number of
applications, and in this nascent field there are many opportunities for
future work. In this section, we discuss some of the key open questions
in meta-RL. Following the method categories in this survey, we first
discuss some important directions for future work in few-shot and many-
shot meta-RL in Section 6.1 and 6.2 respectively. Following this, we
discuss how to utilize offline data in Section 6.3 in order to eliminate
the need for expensive online data collection during adaptation and
meta-training. Finally, we take a critical stance and evaluate some
potential limitations of meta-RL research.
6.1 Few-shot Meta-RL Generalization
As discussed in Section 3, few-shot meta-RL methods are a promising
solution to fast adaptation on new tasks. However, so far their success
is mainly achieved on narrow task distributions, while the ultimate
goal of meta-RL is to enable fast acquisition of entirely new behaviors.
Consequently, future work should focus more on generalization of few-
shot meta-RL methods to broader task distributions. A straightforward
way to achieve this goal is to meta-train on a broader task distribution
329
330 Open Problems
to learn an inductive bias that can generalize to more tasks. However,
training on a broader task distribution also introduces new challenges
(such as a harder exploration problem) that are beyond the scope of
existing methods. For an overview of methods for generalization in RL,
beyond meta-RL, see Kirk et al. (2023). Moreover, even when trained
on a broad task distribution, the agent may still encounter test tasks
that lie outside the training distribution. Generalization to such out-of-
distribution (OOD) tasks is important since a meta-RL agent is likely
to encounter unexpected tasks in the real world. For a summary of the
task distributions in existing benchmarks, see Table 6.1. We discuss
these two open problems, illustrated in Figure 6.1, in more detail below.
Narrow Broad
Meta-Training Meta-Testing
Meta-Training Meta-Training
xOOD Task
Distribution Shift
Figure 6.1: Illustration of broad task distributions (left) and OOD generalization
(right).Thereisaclearneedformeta-trainingdistributionswithbothmoretasksand
more diverse tasks. Novel methods may be needed for such distributions, including
methods that fail gracefully when out of distribution.
Training on broader task distributions for better generalization The
meta-training task distribution plays an important role in meta-RL, as
it determines what inductive bias we can learn from data, while the
meta-RLalgorithmsdeterminehow well wecanlearnthisinductivebias.
The task distribution should be both diverse enough so that the learned
inductive bias can generalize to a wide range of new tasks, and clear
enough in task structure so that there is indeed some shared knowledge
we can utilize for fast adaptation.
However, existing few-shot meta-RL methods are frequently meta-
trained on narrow task distributions, where different tasks are simply
defined by varying a few parameters that specify the reward function or
environment dynamics (Duan et al., 2016b; Finn et al., 2017a; Rakelly
6.1. Few-shot Meta-RL Generalization 331
Table 6.1: Summary of existing benchmarks in meta-RL by setting and number
of tasks. MuJoCo and 2D Navigation are perhaps the most common, but also the
narrowest meta-training distributions. XLand, Alchemy, NetHack, and Procgen are
procedurally generated and so contain many tasks. NetHack and Procgen, however,
were not designed to evaluate adaptation in meta-RL, and XLand is private. Addi-
tionally, benchmarks that contain both discrete tasks and diverse behavior generally
require many tasks in order to generalize to new tasks.
Benchmark
Citation Setting Number of Tasks
Name
XLand 2.0
Team et al. (2023) Game (Diverse) >1040
(private)
Alchemy Wang et al. (2021) Game (Diverse) >167,424
Küttler et al.
NetHack Game (Diverse) >>200,000
(2020)
Cobbe et al.
Procgen Game (Diverse) >>200,000
(2020)
Nichol et al.
Sonic Game (Diverse) 58 discrete
(2018b)
Staley et al. 24; continuous
Meta Arcade Game (Diverse)
(2021) (e.g., ball size)
DreamerGrader Wang et al. (2021) Game (Narrow) 3,556 discrete
e.g., Finn et al.
(2017a) and 25 discrete or
2D Navigation Game (Narrow)
Zintgraf et al. continuous goal
(2020)
James et al. Robotic
RLBench 100 discrete
(2020) (Diverse)
45 discrete;
Robotic
Meta-World Yu et al. (2020a) continuous (e.g.,
(Diverse)
goal)
e.g., Finn et al.
MuJoCo(Todorov
(2017a) and Robotic e.g., 2 discrete or
et al., 2012)
Zintgraf et al. (Narrow) continuous goal
Locomotion
(2020)
et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020). While the structure between such
tasks is clear, the narrowness of the distribution poses problems. For
example, in this setting, task inference is generally trivial. Often, the
agent can infer the parameters that define the task based on just a few
transitions. This makes it hard to evaluate if a meta-RL method can
learn systematical exploration behaviors to infer more sophisticated
task structures. In general, the inductive bias that can be learned from
332 Open Problems
a narrow task distribution is highly tailored to the specific training
distribution, which provides little help for faster acquisition of entirely
new behaviors in a broader task domain. Indeed, Zhao et al. (2022a)
find that meta-RL methods are no better than multi-task pre-training
when tested on generalization to complex visual tasks like Atari games.
Consequently, we need to design benchmarks that are diverse, in
addition to having clear task structures. Such a benchmark would
better reflect the complex task distribution in real-world problems,
and promote the design of new methods that can generalize over these
challenging tasks. For example, some recent robotic benchmarks (James
et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020a) introduce a wide range of manipulation
tasks in simulation with not only parametric diversity (such as moving
an object to different goals), but also non-parametric diversity (such
as picking an object and opening a window). Game benchmarks with
procedurally generated environments provide another good testbed to
evaluate meta-RL on broader task distributions (Nichol et al., 2018b;
Cobbe et al., 2020; Küttler et al., 2020; Staley et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021), as novel environments with both diverse and clear task structures
can be easily generated by following different game rules. For example,
Alchemy (Wang et al., 2021) is a video game benchmark with the goal
of transforming stones with potions into more valuable forms, which
requires the agent to strategically experiment with different hypotheses
for efficient exploration and task inference. As another example, the
Adaptive Agent (Ada) evaluated on XLand 2.0 learns to experiment,
use tools, and navigate in a 3D open-ended environment. In addition to
these simulation benchmarks, Liu et al. (2022c) introduce a real-world
benchmark which requires systematic exploration to discover the errors
in different programs for coding feedback. Existing meta-RL methods
cannot yet achieve satisfactory performance on many of these more
challenging benchmarks (Alver and Precup, 2020; Yu et al., 2020a;
Wang et al., 2021; Mandi et al., 2022), which shows that generalization
to a wider task distribution is still an open problem, and more attention
should be paid to these more challenging benchmarks to push the limit
of meta-RL algorithms.
Still, both new methods and new benchmarks are still needed in
meta-RL. Novel methods, such as the use of curriculum learning (Mehta
6.1. Few-shot Meta-RL Generalization 333
et al., 2020; Team et al., 2023) and active selection of tasks in the
distribution based on task descriptions (Kaddour et al., 2020), will
likely be needed as well to address sufficiently broad distributions. Many
of these benchmarks are insufficient as well, with more work needed to
improve the task distribution itself. For example, some of benchmarks
with the widest task distributions are private (Team et al., 2023),
or not designed to test adaptation in meta-RL (Küttler et al., 2020;
Cobbe et al., 2020). It is also possible that some of these benchmarks
simply need to be more densely populated with tasks in order for
few-shot adaptation to be learnable. For example, Meta-World (Yu
et al., 2020a) has benchmarks with 1, 10, or 45 discrete tasks; however,
meta-learning an algorithm that can reliably adapt to unseen meta-test
tasks may require tens of thousands of meta-training tasks (Kirsch
et al., 2022b). Adapting benchmarks (Benjamins et al., 2021) from the
related Contextual MDP literature (Hallak et al., 2015) in order to
remove the task identity from the state is a path forward. Procedurally
generating tasks is also one promising path for benchmarks (Cobbe
et al., 2020; Küttler et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021; Team et al., 2023).
When tasks have manually designed discrete variation, it can be difficult
to determine whether meta-test tasks even have support within the
meta-training distribution.
Generalization to OOD tasks In few-shot meta-RL, it is commonly
assumed that the meta-training and meta-test tasks are drawn from
the same task distribution. However, in real-world problems, we usually
do not know a priori all the situations the agent may face during
deployment, and the RL agent will likely encounter test tasks that lie
outside the meta-training task distribution.
One key challenge here is that we do not know to what extent the
learned inductive bias is still helpful for solving the OOD tasks. For
example, in the navigation task in Figure 3.9, the learned inductive bias
is an exploration policy that traverses the edge of the semicircle to find
the goal first. If we consider OOD tasks of navigation to goals on the
edge of a semicircle with a larger radius, then the learned exploration
policy is no longer optimal, but may still help the agent explore more
efficiently than from scratch. However, if the OOD tasks are navigation
334 Open Problems
to goals on a semicircle in the opposite direction, then the learned
inductive bias may be actively harmful and slow down learning.
Consequently, simply using the learned inductive bias, which is com-
monly adopted by existing few-shot meta-RL methods, is not sufficient
for OOD generalization. Instead, the agent needs to adaptively choose
how to utilize or adjust the learned inductive bias according to what
kinds of OOD tasks it is solving. On one hand, we want to ensure that
the agent can generalize to any OOD task given enough adaptation
data, even if the learned inductive bias is misspecified. In principle,
PPG methods can satisfy this requirement while black-box methods
cannot, echoing our discussion on the trade-off between generalization
andspecializationoffew-shotmeta-RLmethodsinSection3.1.However,
in practice, if the meta-testing task distribution is sufficiently dissimilar
to the meta-training task distribution, then any sort of meta-learning
can be catastrophic (Xiong et al., 2021). On the other hand, we want
to utilize as much useful information from the learned inductive bias as
possible to improve learning efficiency on OOD tasks. Although recent
works investigate how to improve generalization (Lan et al., 2019; Lin
et al., 2020b; Grewal et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021; Ajay et al., 2022;
He et al., 2022; Imagawa et al., 2022; Greenberg et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023) or adaptation efficiency (Fakoor et al., 2020; Mendonca
et al.,2020;LeeandChung,2021)onOODtaskswithsmalldistribution
shifts, more work remains to be done on how to adaptively handle larger
distribution shifts between training and test tasks. Ideally, OOD meth-
ods make use of their inductive bias where possible, and fail gracefully
(e.g., defaulting to an engineered learning algorithm), where it is not
possible.
6.2 Many-shot Meta-RL: Optimization Issues and Standard Bench-
marks
For many-shot meta-RL (see Section 4), outer-loop optimization poses
significant problems, some of which remain open. Moreover, there is a
lack of standard benchmarks to compare different many-shot meta-RL
methods, an important gap to fill for future work.
6.2. Many-shot Meta-RL 335
Optimization issues in many-shot meta-RL In many-shot meta-RL,
the inner-loop updates the policy many times, which leads to a challeng-
ing optimization problem in the outer-loop due to not smooth objective
surfaces (Metz et al., 2021) and high computation cost. To deal with
these challenges in practice, most methods use the performance after
relatively few inner-loop updates compared to the full inner-loop opti-
mization trajectory as a surrogate objective. Updating the inner-loop
after only a fraction of the lifetime leads to bias in the gradient estima-
tion, which can be detrimental to meta-learning performance (Wu et al.,
2018). How to tackle this optimization issue remains an open problem.
One approach is to use gradient-free optimization methods such as
evolution strategies (Rechenberg, 1971) as was done by Kirsch et al.
(2022a), but its sample complexity is much worse than gradient-based
optimization in settings where those are applicable.
Truncated optimization in many-shot single-task meta-RL Even if
optimizing over long lifetimes was possible in the multi-task setting,
in the single-task setting we still need to update the inner-loop before
learning has finished in order for it to be useful. One approach to
improve truncated optimization on a single task is the bootstrapped
surrogate objective (Flennerhag et al., 2021), which approximates an
update for a longer truncation length with a bootstrapping objective
on a shorter truncation length. However, this also introduces a biased
meta-gradient estimation. Another solution computes meta-gradients
with different numbers of updates in the inner-loop and then computes
a weighted average, similar to TD(λ) (Bonnet et al., 2021). Additionally,
there are still more sources of bias in this setting, such as bias from the
reuse of critics between the inner- and outer-loops (Bonnet et al., 2022).
More research is required to choose the optimal bias-variance trade-off
for meta-gradient estimators under the single-task setting.
Non-stationary optimization in many-shot single-task meta-RL An-
other central challenge in many-shot single-task meta-RL is the non-
stationarity of the inner-loop. In multi-task meta-RL, the inner-loop
revisits the same tasks multiple times, allowing the meta-learner to
fit to the stationary training task distribution. In the single-task case,
336 Open Problems
however, theagent parameters keep changing,making the meta-learning
problem non-stationary. Learning in a non-stationary problem is an
open area of research extending beyond online meta-RL.
Benchmarks for many-shot meta-RL Many-shot meta-RL methods
are mainly evaluated on a wide range of commonly used RL tasks,
such as Atari (Bellemare et al., 2013), classic control (Brockman et
al., 2016) and continuous control (Duan et al., 2016a), to show that
the learned RL algorithms have good generalization. However, some
papers test generalization across different domains while others evaluate
within a single domain, and there are no unified criteria on how to
split the training and test tasks on the chosen domain(s). In the single-
task setting, a benchmark for hyperparameters tuning in RL has been
proposed, but focuses on a fixed and small number of discrete meta-
parameters (Shala et al., 2022). In the multi-task setting, to better
evaluate generalization of the learned algorithms, it could be helpful
to design and adopt benchmarks that choose the meta-train and meta-
test tasks based on some unified standard. In this direction, a useful
benchmark may even provide multiple groups of train and test tasks in
order to gradually increase the difficulty and degree of transfer required,
where ideally the degree of transfer is quantifiable by some measure
of similarity across the MDPs (Ammar et al., 2014). Moreover, the
ultimate goal of many-shot meta-RL is to design general-purpose RL
algorithms that can work well on any reasonable MDP. However, the
exact task structure in such a distribution over all “reasonable” MDPs
is still unclear and needs clarification, as some structure must be shared
across these MDPs to allow for meta-learning in the first place.
6.3 Utilizing Offline Data in Meta-RL
Sofarthemajorityofresearchinmeta-RLfocusesonthesettingofusing
online data for both the outer-loop and the inner-loop. However, when
offline data is available, utilizing it properly is an effective way to reduce
the need for expensive online data collection during both meta-training
(the outer-loop) and adaptation (the inner-loop). Depending on which
kind of data is available for the outer-loop and inner-loop respectively,
6.3. Utilizing Offline Data in Meta-RL 337
we have four different settings, depicted in Figure 6.2. Apart from fully
online meta-RL, the remaining three settings are still underexplored,
and we discuss them below.
Online Outer-Loop Offline Outer-Loop
MDP 1 MDP 1
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1 S0 S1 S2 S0 S1
Online Inner-Loop Online Inner-Loop
Online Outer-Loop Offline Outer-Loop
MDP 1 π MDP 1 π
Offline Data
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1
Offline Data
S0 S1 S2 S0 S1
Offline Inner-Loop Offline Inner-Loop
Figure 6.2: The four different settings using online or offline data. Using an online
outer-loop and online inner-loop is the standard setting. Using an offline outer-loop
with offline inner-loop allows for safe meta-learning and safe-adaptation by forgoing
allexploration,butplacesadditionaldemandsonthedataprovided.Usinganoffline
outer-loop with an online inner-loop allows for safe meta-learning of exploration
behavior, but introduces difficulties such as extensive distribution shift. Using an
onlineouter-loopwithofflineinner-loopallowsformeta-learningofflineRLalgorithms
without distribution shift, but still requires online samples during meta-learning.
Offline outer-loop and offline inner-loop Underthissetting,theagent
can only adapt with offline data, and learn to optimize its adaptation
strategy also with offline data in the outer-loop (Mitchell et al., 2020;
Lee et al., 2020a; Li et al., 2021c; Mitchell et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022;
Yuan and Lu, 2022). This is particularly suitable for scenarios where
online exploration and data collection is costly and even dangerous,
whileofflinelogsofhistoricalbehaviorsareabundant,suchasinrobotics
and industrial control (Levine et al., 2020). However, the offline setting
also introduces new challenges. First, as in standard offline RL, returns
must be estimated solely from offline data, creating issues such as the
overestimation of returns (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020).
Second, and unique to meta-RL, instead of doing online exploration to
collect the data, D, for adaptation, we can only adapt with whatever
offline data is provided for each task. Consequently, the adaptation
performance critically depends on how informative the offline data is
338 Open Problems
about the task. Existing works mainly investigate this offline setting
on simple task distributions where task identity can be easily inferred
from a few randomly sampled transitions in the offline data. However,
how to adapt with offline data on more complicated task distributions
(such as those discussed in Section 6.1), and how different offline data
collection schemes may influence the performance of offline adaptation,
remain open questions.
Offline outer-loop and online inner-loop In this setting, the agent
learns to adapt with online data, by meta-training on purely offline
data (Dorfman et al., 2021; Pong et al., 2022; Ghosh et al., 2022).
Compared to the fully offline setting, this setting is more suitable
for the scenarios where few-shot online adaptation is allowed during
deployment. Online adaptation tackles the aforementioned problem of
limited exploration when adapting with only offline data, but it also
introduces a new challenge: how can we learn a systematic exploration
policy from offline data collected by some unknown policies? Usually,
the desired behaviors of the exploration policy are not covered in the
offline data, which is generally collected in a task-specific way. This
creates a distribution shift between the exploration policy we want to
learn and the offline data we can learn from. This shift can be especially
problematic if the offline data was collected only with an expert that
has access to the ground-truth task (Rafailov et al., 2021). In particular,
it can introduce a problem of ambiguity in the identity of the MDP
(Dorfman et al., 2021). To tackle these challenges, existing works make
additional assumptions on the data collection scheme, which strictly
speaking, violate the offline meta-training setting and thus limit their
application. For example, Pong et al. (2022) allow for some online
meta-training, but only with unsupervised interaction, and they learn
a reward function to generate supervision for this unsupervised online
interaction. Additionally, Rafailov et al. (2021) make assumptions about
the reward that enable easy reward relabeling when swapping offline
trajectories between tasks. How to relax offline assumptions to make
this setting more applicable remains an open problem.
6.4. Limitations 339
Online outer-loop and offline inner-loop Under this setting, theagent
can only adapt with offline data. However, online data is available in
the outer-loop to help the agent learn what is a good offline adaptation
strategy, which may be easier to learn than in an offline outer-loop
setting. In other words, the agent is learning to do offline RL via online
RL. This setting is appealing for two reasons: (1) It maintains the
benefits of using solely offline data for adaptation, while being easier
to meta-train than the fully offline setting. (2) It is difficult to design
good offline RL algorithms (Levine et al., 2020), and meta-RL provides
a promising approach to automating this process. A couple of existing
methods do combine an offline inner-loop with an online outer-loop
(Prat and Johns, 2021; Dance et al., 2021). However, these approaches
both allow for additional online adaptation after the offline adaptation
in the inner-loop, and the offline data either contains only observations
(Danceet al.,2021),orconditionsonadditionalexpertactions(Pratand
Johns,2021).Onemethodusespermutation-invariantmemorytoenable
an off-policy inner-loop, but only evaluates with data collected from
prior policies (Imagawa et al., 2022). Consequently, offline RL via online
RL remains an interesting setting for future work with the potential for
designing more effective offline RL algorithms by meta-learning in both
the few-shot and many-shot settings.
6.4 Limitations
So far we have presented a positive case for the use and development
of meta-RL. While meta-RL can confer many advantages, as a tool for
solving problems, it also presents several trade-offs. At this point, we
take a step back to discuss four limitations of meta-RL from a more
critical perspective.
While meta-RL can enable sample-efficient learning at deployment,
it does so at the expense of increased sample complexity during meta-
training. For this reason, meta-RL is only applicable when upfront
data collection is relatively cheap, or adaption during deployment is
prohibitively expensive. For example, the trade-off presented by meta-
learning makes sense when a simulator is available for meta-training, or
when adaptation needs to be efficient and frequent after meta-training.
340 Open Problems
While this limitation is restrictive, it is not significantly more restrictive
than the standard use case for reinforcement learning.
Meta-RL additionally presents a trade-off between transferability
and interpretability on one hand and sample efficiency and engineering
burden on the other. While meta-RL methods may enable adaptation
that is more sample-efficient than a manually engineered alternative,
the insights produced by such systems may be less interpretable and
transferable to novel problems. For example, in the many-shot set-
ting, it may be possible to meta-learn a general-purpose RL algorithm
that is better than state-of-the-art algorithms, but even so, the exact
mechanisms improving performance may be unclear. Consider meta-
learning an objective function that is parameterized as a black-box. The
meta-learned objective function may have a simple and interpretable
form, but extricating this form from the weights and biases of a neural
network is difficult. Meta-RL replaces engineering effort and domain
expertise with computation, and in doing so, trades-off interpretability
for performance.
Inthefew-shotsetting(Section3),itiscommontoadapttotasksus-
ing gradient updates in the inner-loop. However, whether meta-learning
to account for this procedure is worthwhile can depend on the particular
task distribution. For example, when there is a limited number of tasks
or limited amount of data in the inner-loop, it may even be preferable
to have MAML perform no task adaptation during meta-training and
only fine-tune at meta-test time (Gao and Sener, 2020). (In the super-
vised setting, it has likewise been shown that fine-tuning, only after
meta-training, outperforms learning to fine-tune, when meta-training a
black-box method; Beck et al., 2025.) Additionally, if the task distri-
bution never requires different actions for the same state in different
tasks, e.g., because the state-space does not overlap, then adaptation
may not be needed and multi-task training may be sufficient. In such a
setting, even if more adaptation is useful for generalization, meta-RL
may confer little to no advantage compared to fine-tuning (Mandi et al.,
2022).Moreover,evenifadaptationtoeachtaskisneeded,andsufficient
data is provided, as is typically assumed, meta-RL can actually confer
a disadvantage. Specifically, test-time adaptation can decrease perfor-
mance on some tasks in practice (Deleu and Bengio, 2018), and training
6.4. Limitations 341
from scratch can yield higher returns (Xiong et al., 2021). (Similar
observations have been made in the meta-supervised setting as well;
Triantafillou et al., 2020.) In fact, if the meta-testing task distribution
is sufficiently dissimilar to the meta-training task distribution, then
any sort of meta-learning can be catastrophic, since the agent learns
incorrect inductive biases (Xiong et al., 2021).
Finally, while the meta-RL literature develops many specialized
methods, the problem setting may not require such methods. Con-
sider that the meta-RL problem can be considered a particular type of
POMDP, as discussed in Section 3.5. Given this, it is reasonable to ques-
tion whether specialized methods are needed for meta-RL at all. In the
zero-shotsetting,recentworkhassuggestedthatmanycomplexandspe-
cialized methods may be unnecessary. For example, some task-inference
methods can be nearly matched by well-tuned end-to-end recurrent
networks (Ni et al., 2022); complicated task-inference parameteriza-
tions and supervision can be outperformed by hypernetworks trained
end-to-end (Beck et al., 2022); some task inference methods (Humplik
et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2021) can be seen as applications of more general
POMDP methods for inferring a hidden state (Moreno et al., 2018;
Guo et al., 2018); and complicated task-inference reward bonuses for
exploration may be just as effectively replaced by more general explo-
ration methods for POMDPs (Yin et al., 2021) applied to the meta-RL
problem setting (Zintgraf et al., 2021c). Even for complicated task
distributions, methods designed for MDPs and more general POMDPs,
such as curriculum learning, distillation, and transformer architectures,
can be sufficient to enable meta-learning (Team et al., 2023). Still, even
if specialized methods are not strictly necessary, such methods can
enable more efficient meta-learning. Moreover, whether meta-learning
methods are developed explicitly or not, meta-learning will at the very
least be an emergent phenomenon of any capable and general agent.
For this reason, insights from meta-RL should assist practitioners in
developing and reasoning about such systems.
7
Conclusion
In this survey, we presented a survey of meta-RL research focused on
two major categories of algorithms as well as applications. We found
the majority of research focused on the few-shot multi-task setting,
where the objective is to learn an RL algorithm that adapts to new
tasks from a known task distribution rapidly using as few samples as
possible. We discussed the strengths and weaknesses of the few-shot
algorithms,whichgenerallyfall inthecategoriesofparameterizedpolicy
gradient, black box, and task inference methods. A central topic in
using these methods is how to explore the environment to collect that
data. We identified the different exploration strategies in the literature
and discussed when each of them are applicable. Besides meta-RL in
the few-shot setting, a rising topic in meta-RL looks at algorithms in
the many-shot setting, where two distinct problems are considered: the
generalization to broader task distributions and faster learning on a
single task. We found the methods for these two seemingly opposite
problems to be surprisingly similar, as they are often based on augment-
ing standard RL algorithms with learned components. We presented
promising applications of meta-RL, especially those in robotics, where
meta-RL is starting to enable significant sample efficiency gains in e.g.,
342
343
sim-to-real transfer. The sample efficiency of RL algorithms is a major
blocker in learning controllers for real-world applications. Therefore,
if meta-RL delivers on the promise of sample efficient adaptation, it
would enable a wide variety of applications. In order to push meta-RL
further and enable new applications, we found that broader and more
diverse task distributions need to be developed for training and testing
the meta-RL algorithms. With promising applications in sight and a
range of open problems awaiting solutions, we expect meta-RL research
to continue to actively grow.
Appendix
A
List of Venues Surveyed
This survey is primarily based on the meta-RL research presented in the
following conferences and workshops for the years from 2017 to 2022:
• International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
• Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
• International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
• Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS)
• Annual AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)
• Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL)
• Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS)
• International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS)
• NeurIPS Workshop on Meta-Learning
• ICLR Workshop on Meta-Learning
345
References
Agarwal, A., S. Kakade, A. Krishnamurthy, and W. Sun. (2020).
“Flambe: Structural complexity and representation learning of low
rank mdps”. Advances in neural information processing systems. 33:
20095–20107.
Ajay, A., D. Ghosh, S. Levine, P. Agrawal, and A. Gupta. (2022). “Dis-
tributionally Adaptive Meta Reinforcement Learning”. In: Decision
Awareness in Reinforcement Learning Workshop at ICML 2022.
Akkaya, I., M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin, B. McGrew,
A. Petron, A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas, et al.
(2019). “Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.07113.
Akuzawa, K., Y. Iwasawa, and Y. Matsuo. (2021). “Estimating Dis-
entangled Belief about Hidden State and Hidden Task for Meta-
Reinforcement Learning”. In: Learning for Dynamics and Control.
PMLR. 73–86.
Alemi, A. A., I. Fischer, J. V. Dillon, and K. Murphy. (2017). “Deep
Variational Information Bottleneck”. In: International Conference
on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=HyxQzBceg.
Alet, F., M. F. Schneider, T. Lozano-Perez, and L. P. Kaelbling. (2020).
“Meta-learning curiosity algorithms”. In: International Conference
on Learning Representations.
346
References 347
Almeida, D., C. Winter, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. (2021). “A
generalizable approach to learning optimizers”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.00958.
Alver, S. and D. Precup. (2020). “A Brief Look at Generalization in
Visual Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: 4th Lifelong Machine
Learning Workshop at ICML 2020. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=WrCFtzVEwn.
Ammar, H. B., E. Eaton, M. E. Taylor, D. C. Mocanu, K. Driessens,
G. Weiss, and K. Tuyls. (2014). “An automated measure of mdp
similarity for transfer in reinforcement learning”. In: Workshops at
the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Andrychowicz, M., M. Denil, S. Gomez, M. W. Hoffman, D. Pfau, T.
Schaul, B. Shillingford, and N. De Freitas. (2016). “Learning to
learn by gradient descent by gradient descent”. Advances in neural
information processing systems.
Anne, T., J. Wilkinson, and Z. Li. (2021). “Meta-Learning for Fast
AdaptiveLocomotionwithUncertaintiesinEnvironmentsandRobot
Dynamics”. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 4568–4575.
Arndt, K., M. Hazara, A. Ghadirzadeh, and V. Kyrki. (2020). “Meta
Reinforcement Learning for Sim-to-real Domain Adaptation”. In:
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). 2725–2731. doi: 10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196540.
Arumugam, D. and S. Singh. (2022). “Planning to the Information
Horizon of BAMDPs via Epistemic State Abstraction”. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A.
Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=7eUOC9fEIRO.
Aubret, A., L. Matignon, and S. Hassas. (2019). “A survey on
intrinsic motivation in reinforcement learning”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.06976.
Baxter, J. (2000). “A model of inductive bias learning”. Journal of
artificial intelligence research. 12: 149–198.
348 References
Bechtle, S., A. Molchanov, Y. Chebotar, E. Grefenstette, L. Righetti,
G. Sukhatme, and F. Meier. (2021). “Meta Learning via Learned
Loss”.In:202025thInternationalConferenceonPatternRecognition
(ICPR). IEEE Computer Society. 4161–4168.
Beck, J., K. Ciosek, S. Devlin, S. Tschiatschek, C. Zhang, and K.
Hofmann. (2020). “AMRL: Aggregated Memory For Reinforcement
Learning”.In:InternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations.
url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkl7bREtDr.
Beck, J., M. Jackson, R. Vuorio, and S. Whiteson. (2022). “Hypernet-
works in Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. CoRL.
Beck, J., M. Jackson, R. Vuorio, Z. Xiong, and S. Whiteson. (2024).
“SplAgger: Split Aggregation for Meta-Reinforcement Learning”.
Reinforcement Learning Conference.
Beck, J., S. Surana, M. McAuliffe, O. Bent, T. D. Barrett, J. J. G. Luis,
and P. Duckworth. (2025). “Metalic: Meta-Learning In-Context
with Protein Language Models”. In: The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=TUKt7ag0qq.
Beck, J., R. Vuorio, Z. Xiong, and S. Whiteson. (2023). “Recurrent
Hypernetworks are Surprisingly Strong in Meta-RL”. In: Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=pefAAzu8an.
Belkhale, S., R. Li, G. Kahn, R. McAllister, R. Calandra, and S. Levine.
(2021). “Model-based meta-reinforcement learning for flight with
suspended payloads”. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. 6(2):
1471–1478.
Bellec, G., D. Salaj, A. Subramoney, R. Legenstein, and W. Maass.
(2018). “Long short-term memory and Learning-to-learn in networks
of spiking neurons”. NeurIPS.
Bellemare, M. G., S. Candido, P. S. Castro, J. Gong, M. C. Machado,
S. Moitra, S. S. Ponda, and Z. Wang. (2020). “Autonomous naviga-
tion of stratospheric balloons using reinforcement learning”. Nature.
588(7836): 77–82.
Bellemare, M. G., Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. (2013). “The
arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform for general
agents”. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. 47: 253–279.
References 349
Benjamins, C., T. Eimer, F. Schubert, A. Biedenkapp, B. Rosenhahn,
F. Hutter, and M. Lindauer. (2021). “CARL: A Benchmark for
Contextual and Adaptive Reinforcement Learning”.
Berseth,G.,Z.Zhang,G.Zhang,C.Finn,andS.Levine.(2021).“Comps:
Continual meta policy search”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04467.
Bonardi, A., S. James, and A. J. Davison. (2020). “Learning One-Shot
Imitation from Humans without Humans”. CVPR.
Bonnet, C., P. Caron, T. D. Barrett, I. Davies, and A. Laterre. (2021).
“OneStepataTime:ProsandConsofMulti-StepMeta-GradientRe-
inforcement Learning”. 5th Workshop on Meta-Learning at NeurIPS.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.00206.
Bonnet, C., L. I. Midgley, and A. Laterre. (2022). “Debiasing Meta-
Gradient Reinforcement Learning by Learning the Outer Value
Function”. In: Sixth Workshop on Meta-Learning at the Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=HFVmkIRJ4J.
Boutilier, C., C.-w. Hsu, B. Kveton, M. Mladenov, C. Szepesvari, and M.
Zaheer. (2020). “Differentiable Meta-Learning of Bandit Policies”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin.
Vol.33.CurranAssociates,Inc.2122–2134.url:https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/171ae1bbb81475eb96287dd78565b38b-
Paper.pdf.
Brockman, G., V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman,
J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. (2016). “Openai gym”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01540.
Brown, T., B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A.
Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D.
Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin,
S.Gray,B.Chess,J.Clark,C.Berner,S.McCandlish,A.Radford,I.
Sutskever, and D. Amodei. (2020). “Language Models are Few-Shot
Learners”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
350 References
Burda,Y.,H.Edwards,A.Storkey,andO.Klimov.(2019).“Exploration
by random network distillation”. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
H1lJJnR5Ym.
Burega,B.,J.D.Martin,andM.Bowling.(2022).“LearningtoPrioritize
Planning Updates in Model-based Reinforcement Learning”. In:
Sixth Workshop on Meta-Learning at the Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=uR7ePjeB6z.
Chalvidal,M.,T.Serre,andR.VanRullen.(2022).“Meta-Reinforcement
Learning with Self-Modifying Networks”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D.
Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
cYeYzaP-5AF.
Chan, S. C. Y., I. Dasgupta, J. Kim, D. Kumaran, A. K. Lampinen,
and F. Hill. (2022). “Transformers generalize differently from infor-
mation stored in context vs in weights”. In: Workshop on Memory
in Artificial and Real Intelligence at NeurIPS.
Charakorn, R., P. Manoonpong, and N. Dilokthanakul. (2021). “Learn-
ing to Cooperate with Unseen Agents Through Meta-Reinforcement
Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 1478–1479.
Chen,C.,H.Wei,N.Xu,G.Zheng,M.Yang,Y.Xiong,K.Xu,andZ.Li.
(2020). “Toward a thousand lights: Decentralized deep reinforcement
learning for large-scale traffic signal control”. In: Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 34. No. 04. 3414–
3421.
Chen, X., J. Hu, C. Jin, L. Li, and L. Wang. (2022). “Understanding
Domain Randomization for Sim-to-real Transfer”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=T8vZHIRTrY.
Chen, Y., M. W. Hoffman, S. G. Colmenarejo, M. Denil, T. P. Lillicrap,
M. Botvinick, and N. Freitas. (2017). “Learning to learn without
gradient descent by gradient descent”. In: International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR. 748–756.
References 351
Cheng, Y., S. Feng, J. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Liang. (2022). “Prov-
able benefit of multitask representation learning in reinforcement
learning”. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 35:
31741–31754.
Choshen, E. and A. Tamar. (2023). “ContraBAR: Contrastive Bayes-
Adaptive Deep RL”. ICML.
Chowdhery, A., S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts,
P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann, P. Schuh, K.
Shi, S. Tsvyashchenko, J. Maynez, A. Rao, P. Barnes, Y. Tay, N.
Shazeer, V. Prabhakaran, E. Reif, N. Du, B. Hutchinson, R. Pope,
J. Bradbury, J. Austin, M. Isard, G. Gur-Ari, P. Yin, T. Duke,
A. Levskaya, S. Ghemawat, S. Dev, H. Michalewski, X. Garcia, V.
Misra, K. Robinson, L. Fedus, D. Zhou, D. Ippolito, D. Luan, H.
Lim, B. Zoph, A. Spiridonov, R. Sepassi, D. Dohan, S. Agrawal,
M. Omernick, A. M. Dai, T. S. Pillai, M. Pellat, A. Lewkowycz, E.
Moreira, R. Child, O. Polozov, K. Lee, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, B. Saeta,
M. Diaz, O. Firat, M. Catasta, J. Wei, K. Meier-Hellstern, D. Eck,
J. Dean, S. Petrov, and N. Fiedel. (2022). “PaLM: Scaling Language
Modeling with Pathways”.
Clavera, I., J. Rothfuss, J. Schulman, Y. Fujita, T. Asfour, and P.
Abbeel. (2018). “Model-Based Reinforcement Learning via Meta-
Policy Optimization”. CoRL.
Cobbe, K., C. Hesse, J. Hilton, and J. Schulman. (2020). “Leveraging
procedural generation to benchmark reinforcement learning”. In:
International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2048–2056.
Collins, L., A. Mokhtari, S. Oh, and S. Shakkottai. (2022). “Maml and
anil provably learn representations”. In: International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR. 4238–4310.
Cong, L., M. Görner, P. Ruppel, H. Liang, N. Hendrich, and J. Zhang.
(2020). “Self-Adapting Recurrent Models for Object Pushing from
Learning in Simulation”. IROS.
352 References
Dance, C. R., J. Perez, and T. Cachet. (2021). “Demonstration-
Conditioned Reinforcement Learning for Few-Shot Imitation”. In:
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing.Ed.byM.MeilaandT.Zhang.Vol.139.Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research. PMLR. 2376–2387. url: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v139/dance21a.html.
Dasari, S. and A. Gupta. (2020). “Transformers for One-Shot Visual
Imitation”. CoRL. abs/2011.05970. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2011.05970.
Deleu, T. and Y. Bengio. (2018). “The effects of negative adaptation in
model-agnostic meta-learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02159.
Denevi, G., C. Ciliberto, R. Grazzi, and M. Pontil. (2019). “Learning-
to-learn stochastic gradient descent with biased regularization”. In:
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 1566–1575.
Dennis, M., N. Jaques, E. Vinitsky, A. Bayen, S. Russell, A. Critch, and
S. Levine. (2020). “Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via
unsupervised environment design”. Advances in neural information
processing systems. 33: 13049–13061.
Devlin, J., M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. (2019). “BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Un-
derstanding”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers).
Dorfman, R., I. Shenfeld, and A. Tamar. (2021). “Offline Meta Rein-
forcement Learning–Identifiability Challenges and Effective Data
Collection Strategies”. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 34: 4607–4618.
Duan, Y., M. Andrychowicz, B. C. Stadie, J. Ho, J. Schneider, I.
Sutskever, P. Abbeel, and W. Zaremba. (2017). “One-Shot Imi-
tation Learning”. In: NIPS.
Duan, Y., X. Chen, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, and P. Abbeel. (2016a).
“Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for continuous control”.
In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 1329–
1338.
References 353
Duan, Y., J. Schulman, X. Chen, P. L. Bartlett, I. Sutskever, and
P. Abbeel. (2016b). “RL2: Fast reinforcement learning via slow
reinforcement learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779.
Duff, M. O. and A. Barto. (2002). “Optimal Learning: Computational
Procedures for Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision Processes”. PhD
thesis.
Elawady, A., G. Chhablani, R. Ramrakhya, K. Yadav, D. Batra, Z. Kira,
and A. Szot. (2024). “ReLIC: A Recipe for 64k Steps of In-Context
Reinforcement Learning for Embodied AI”. arXiv.
Ellis, B., S. Moalla, M. Samvelyan, M. Sun, A. Mahajan, J. N. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson. (2022). “SMACv2: An Improved Benchmark for
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.07489.
Emukpere, D., X. Alameda-Pineda, and C. Reinke. (2021). “Successor
Feature Neural Episodic Control”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03110.
Espeholt, L., H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih, T. Ward,
Y. Doron, V. Firoiu, T. Harley, I. Dunning, et al. (2018). “Impala:
Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR. 1407–1416.
Eysenbach, B., A. Gupta, J. Ibarz, and S. Levine. (2019). “Diversity is
All You Need: Learning Skills without a Reward Function”. ICLR.
Fakoor, R., P. Chaudhari, S. Soatto, and A. J. Smola. (2020). “Meta-
Q-Learning”. In: International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Fallah, A., K. Georgiev, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar. (2020). “Prov-
ably convergent policy gradient methods for model-agnostic meta-
reinforcement learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05135.
Fallah, A., K. Georgiev, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar. (2021). “On the
convergence theory of debiased model-agnostic meta-reinforcement
learning”. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 34:
3096–3107.
Farquhar, G., S. Whiteson, and J. Foerster. (2019). “Loaded DiCE:
Trading off bias and variance in any-order score function gradient
estimators for reinforcement learning”. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems.
354 References
Feng, X., O. Slumbers, Z. Wan, B. Liu, S. McAleer, Y. Wen, J. Wang,
and Y. Yang. (2021). “Neural auto-curricula in two-player zero-sum
games”. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 34.
Finn, C., P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. (2017a). “Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 1126–1135.
Finn, C. and S. Levine. (2018). “Meta-Learning and Universality: Deep
Representations and Gradient Descent can Approximate any Learn-
ing Algorithm”. ICLR.
Finn, C., A. Rajeswaran, S. Kakade, and S. Levine. (2019). “Online
meta-learning”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR. 1920–1930.
Finn,C.,T.Yu,T.Zhang,P.Abbeel,andS.Levine.(2017b).“One-Shot
Visual Imitation Learning via Meta-Learning”. CoRL.
Flennerhag, S., A. A. Rusu, R. Pascanu, F. Visin, H. Yin, and R.
Hadsell. (2020). “Meta-Learning with Warped Gradient Descent”.
In: International Conference on Learning Representations. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkeiQlBFPB.
Flennerhag, S., Y. Schroecker, T. Zahavy, H. van Hasselt, D. Silver, and
S. Singh. (2021). “Bootstrapped Meta-Learning”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.04504.
Foerster, J., G. Farquhar, M. Al-Shedivat, T. Rocktäschel, E. Xing,
and S. Whiteson. (2018a). “Dice: The infinitely differentiable monte
carlo estimator”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR. 1529–1538.
Foerster,J.N.,R.Y.Chen,M.Al-Shedivat,S.Whiteson,P.Abbeel,and
I. Mordatch. (2018b). “Learning with Opponent-Learning Aware-
ness”. AAMAS.
Fortunato, M., M. Tan, R. Faulkner, S. Hansen, A. P. Badia, G. Butti-
more, C. Deck, J. Z. Leibo, and C. Blundell. (2019). “Generalization
of Reinforcement Learners with Working and Episodic Memory”.
NeurIPS.
Fu, H., H. Tang, J. Hao, C. Chen, X. Feng, D. Li, and W. Liu. (2021).
“Towards effective context for meta-reinforcement learning: an ap-
proach based on contrastive learning”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 35. No. 8. 7457–7465.
References 355
Fujimoto, S., D. Meger, and D. Precup. (2019). “Off-Policy Deep Rein-
forcement Learning without Exploration”. ICML.
Galashov, A., J. Schwarz, H. Kim, M. Garnelo, D. Saxton, P. Kohli,
S. M. A. Eslami, and Y. W. Teh. (2019). “Meta-Learning surrogate
models for sequential decision making”.
Gao, C., Y. Jiang, and F. Chen. (2022). “Transferring Hierarchical
Structures with Dual Meta Imitation Learning”. In: 6th Annual
Conference on Robot Learning. url: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=MUcBYHjzqp7.
Gao, K. and O. Sener. (2020). “Modeling and Optimization Trade-
off in Meta-learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
M. Balcan, and H. Lin. Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc. 11154–
11165. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
7fc63ff01769c4fa7d9279e97e307829-Paper.pdf.
Gao, Y., E. Sibirtseva, G. Castellano, and D. Kragic. (2019). “Fast
adaptation with meta-reinforcement learning for trust modelling
in human-robot interaction”. In: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 305–
312.
Garau-Luis, J. J., Y. Miao, J. D. Co-Reyes, A. Parisi, J. Tan, E. Real,
and A. Faust. (2022). “Multi-objective evolution for generalizable
policy gradient algorithms”. In: ICLR 2022 Workshop on Generaliz-
able Policy Learning in Physical World.
Garcia, F. M. and P. S. Thomas. (2019). “A Meta-MDP Approach to
Exploration for Lifelong Reinforcement Learning”. NeurIPS.
Garnelo, M., J. Schwarz, D. Rosenbaum, F. Viola, D. J. Rezende,
S. M. A. Eslami, and Y. W. Teh. (2018). “Neural Processes”. ICML.
Gerstgrasser, M. and D. C. Parkes. (2022). “Meta-RL for Multi-Agent
RL: Learning to Adapt to Evolving Agents”. In: Sixth Workshop on
Meta-Learning at the Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=0toY1f8-Iq9.
356 References
Ghadirzadeh, A., X. Chen, P. Poklukar, C. Finn, M. Björkman, and D.
Kragic. (2021). “Bayesian Meta-Learning for Few-Shot Policy Adap-
tation Across Robotic Platforms”. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 1274–1280.
doi: 10.1109/IROS51168.2021.9636628.
Ghavamzadeh, M., S. Mannor, J. Pineau, A. Tamar, et al. (2015).
“Bayesian reinforcement learning: A survey”. Foundations and
Trends® in Machine Learning. 8(5-6): 359–483.
Ghosh,D.,A.Ajay,P.Agrawal,andS.Levine.(2022).“Offlinerlpolicies
should be trained to be adaptive”. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR. 7513–7530.
Goldie, A. D., C. Lu, M. T. Jackson, S. Whiteson, and J. N. Foerster.
(2024). “Can Learned Optimization Make Reinforcement Learning
Less Difficult?” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Goo, W. and S. Niekum. (2019). “One-shot learning of multi-step tasks
from observation via activity localization in auxiliary video”. In:
2019 international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE. 7755–7761.
Graves, A., G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka. (2014). “Neural Turing Ma-
chines”. arXiv. abs/1410.5401. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.5401.
Greenberg, I., S. Mannor, G. Chechik, and E. Meirom. (2023). “Train
Hard, Fight Easy: Robust Meta Reinforcement Learning”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.11147.
Grewal, Y. S., F. de Nijs, and S. Goodwin. (2021). “Variance-Seeking
Meta-Exploration to Handle Out-of-Distribution Tasks”. In: Deep
RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021.
Grigsby, J., L. Fan, and Y. Zhu. (2024). “AMAGO: Scalable In-Context
Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Agents”. ICLR.
Grover,A.,M.Al-Shedivat,J.Gupta,Y.Burda,andH.Edwards.(2018).
“Learning Policy Representations in Multiagent Systems”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Ed. by J. Dy and A. Krause. Vol. 80. Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research. PMLR. 1802–1811. url: https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v80/grover18a.html.
References 357
Guez, A., D. Silver, and P. Dayan. (2013). “Scalable and efficient Bayes-
adaptive reinforcement learning based on Monte-Carlo tree search”.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. 48: 841–883.
Guo, Y., Q. Wu, and H. Lee. (2022). “Learning Action Translator for
Meta Reinforcement Learning on Sparse-Reward Tasks”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 36.
No. 6. 6792–6800.
Guo, Z. D., M. G. Azar, B. Piot, B. A. Pires, and R. Munos.
(2018). “Neural predictive belief representations”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.06407.
Gupta,A.,M.Lanctot,andA.Lazaridou.(2021).“Dynamicpopulation-
based meta-learning for multi-agent communication with natural
language”. NeurIPS.
Gupta, A., B. Eysenbach, C. Finn, and S. Levine. (2018a). “Un-
supervised Meta-Learning for Reinforcement Learning”. arXiv.
abs/1806.04640.
Gupta, A., R. Mendonca, Y. Liu, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. (2018b).
“Meta-Reinforcement Learning of Structured Exploration Strate-
gies”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Ed. by S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N.
Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett. Vol. 31. Curran Associates, Inc.
url: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2018 / file /
4de754248c196c85ee4fbdcee89179bd-Paper.pdf.
Gurumurthy, S., S. Kumar, and K. Sycara. (2020). “MAME : Model-
Agnostic Meta-Exploration”. In: Proceedings of the Conference on
Robot Learning. Ed. by L. P. Kaelbling, D. Kragic, and K. Sugiura.
Vol. 100. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR. 910–
922. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/gurumurthy20a.html.
Ha,D.,A.Dai,andQ.V.Le.(2017).“Hypernetworks”.In:International
Conference on Learning Representation (ICLR).
Haarnoja, T., A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. (2018). “Soft actor-
critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning
with a stochastic actor”. In: International conference on machine
learning. PMLR. 1861–1870.
Hallak, A., D. D. Castro, and S. Mannor. (2015). “Contextual Markov
Decision Processes”.
358 References
Harrison, J., A. Sharma, R. Calandra, and M. Pavone. (2018). “Control
adaptation via meta-learning dynamics”. In: Workshop on Meta-
Learning at NeurIPS. Vol. 2018.
Hausknecht, M. J. and P. Stone. (2015). “Deep Recurrent Q-Learning
for Partially Observable MDPs”. In: AAAI Fall Symposia.
He, J. Z.-Y., Z. Erickson, D. S. Brown, A. Raghunathan, and A. Dragan.
(2022). “Learning Representations that Enable Generalization in
Assistive Tasks”. In: 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=b88HF4vd_ej.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior; a neuropsychological
theory.
Heess, N., J. J. Hunt, T. P. Lillicrap, and D. Silver. (2015). “Memory-
based control with recurrent neural networks”. NIPS Deep Rein-
forcement Learning Workshop.
Hejna III, D. J. and D. Sadigh. (2022). “Few-Shot Preference Learning
for Human-in-the-Loop RL”. In: 6th Annual Conference on Robot
Learning. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=IKC5TfXLuW0.
Hessel, M., H. Soyer, L. Espeholt, W. Czarnecki, S. Schmitt, and H.
Van Hasselt. (2019). “Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with
popart”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence. Vol. 33. No. 01. 3796–3803.
Hiraoka, T., T. Imagawa, V. Tangkaratt, T. Osa, T. Onishi, and Y.
Tsuruoka. (2021). “Meta-model-based meta-policy optimization”.
In: Asian Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 129–144.
Hochreiter, S., A. S. Younger, and P. R. Conwell. (2001). “Learning
to learn using gradient descent”. In: International conference on
artificial neural networks. Springer. 87–94.
Hospedales, T., A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey. (2020).
“Meta-learning in neural networks: A survey”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05439.
Houthooft, R., Y. Chen, P. Isola, B. Stadie, F. Wolski, O. Jonathan Ho,
and P. Abbeel. (2018). “Evolved Policy Gradients”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Bengio, H. Wal-
lach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett.
Vol.31.CurranAssociates,Inc.url:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2018/file/7876acb66640bad41f1e1371ef30c180-Paper.pdf.
References 359
Hu,J.,X.Chen,C.Jin,L.Li,andL.Wang.(2021).“Near-optimalrepre-
sentation learning for linear bandits and linear rl”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 4349–4358.
Huisman, M., J. N. Van Rijn, and A. Plaat. (2021). “A survey of deep
meta-learning”. Artificial Intelligence Review. 54(6): 4483–4541.
Humplik, J., A. Galashov, L. Hasenclever, P. A. Ortega, Y. W. Teh, and
N. Heess. (2019). “Meta reinforcement learning as task inference”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06424.
Imagawa, T., T. Hiraoka, and Y. Tsuruoka. (2022). “Off-Policy Meta-
Reinforcement Learning With Belief-Based Task Inference”. IEEE
Access. 10: 49494–49507.
Jabri, A., K. Hsu, A. Gupta, B. Eysenbach, S. Levine, and C. Finn.
(2019). “Unsupervised curricula for visual meta-reinforcement learn-
ing”. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 32.
Jackson, M. T., M. Jiang, J. Parker-Holder, R. Vuorio, C. Lu, G. Far-
quhar,S.Whiteson,andJ.N.Foerster.(2023).“DiscoveringGeneral
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms with Adversarial Environment
Design”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02782.
Jaderberg, M., V. Mnih, W. M. Czarnecki, T. Schaul, J. Z. Leibo, D.
Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu. (2016). “Reinforcement learning with
unsupervised auxiliary tasks”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05397.
James, S., M. Bloesch, and A. J. Davison. (2018). “Task-Embedded
Control Networks for Few-Shot Imitation Learning”. In: CoRL.
James, S., Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison. (2020). “Rlbench:
The robot learning benchmark & learning environment”. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters. 5(2): 3019–3026.
Jang, E., A. Irpan, M. Khansari, D. Kappler, F. Ebert, C. Lynch, S.
Levine, and C. Finn. (2021). “BC-Z: Zero-Shot Task Generaliza-
tion with Robotic Imitation Learning”. In: 5th Annual Conference
on Robot Learning. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
8kbp23tSGYv.
Jin, C., Z. Yang, Z. Wang, and M. I. Jordan. (2020). “Provably effi-
cient reinforcement learning with linear function approximation”.
In: Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR. 2137–2143.
360 References
Kaddour, J., S. Saemundsson, and M. Deisenroth (he/him). (2020).
“Probabilistic Active Meta-Learning”. In: Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato,
R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin. Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc.
20813–20822. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
ef0d17b3bdb4ee2aa741ba28c7255c53-Paper.pdf.
Kamienny, P.-A., M. Pirotta, A. Lazaric, T. Lavril, N. Usunier, and
L. Denoyer. (2020). “Learning adaptive exploration strategies in dy-
namic environments through informed policy regularization”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.02934.
Katharopoulos, A., A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret. (2020). “Trans-
formers are RNNs: Fast Autoregressive Transformers with Linear
Attention”. ICML.
Kaushik,R.,T.Anne,andJ.-B.Mouret.(2020).“Fastonlineadaptation
in robotics through meta-learning embeddings of simulated priors”.
In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 5269–5276.
Khodak, M., M.-F. F. Balcan, and A. S. Talwalkar. (2019). “Adap-
tive gradient-based meta-learning methods”. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 32.
Kim, D. K., M. Liu, M. D. Riemer, C. Sun, M. Abdulhai, G. Habibi,
S. Lopez-Cot, G. Tesauro, and J. How. (2021). “A policy gradient
algorithmforlearningtolearninmultiagentreinforcementlearning”.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 5541–
5550.
Kirk, R., A. Zhang, E. Grefenstette, and T. Rocktäschel. (2023). “A
survey of zero-shot generalisation in deep reinforcement learning”.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. 76: 201–264.
Kirsch,L.,S.Flennerhag,H.vanHasselt,A.Friesen,J.Oh,andY.Chen.
(2022a). “Introducing Symmetries to Black Box Meta Reinforcement
Learning”. AAAI.
Kirsch, L., J. Harrison, C. D. Freeman, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and J.
Schmidhuber. (2023). “Towards General-Purpose In-Context Learn-
ing Agents”. In: NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Distribution Shifts:
New Frontiers with Foundation Models.
References 361
Kirsch, L., J. Harrison, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and L. Metz. (2022b).
“General-purposein-contextlearningbymeta-learningtransformers”.
arXiv.
Kirsch, L., S. van Steenkiste, and J. Schmidhuber. (2019). “Improv-
ing generalization in meta reinforcement learning using learned
objectives”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04098.
Korshunova, I., J. Degrave, J. Dambre, A. Gretton, and F. Huszar.
(2020). “Exchangeable Models in Meta Reinforcement Learning”.
In: 4th Lifelong Machine Learning Workshop at ICML 2020. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=TZFlzejFPT.
Kumar, A., Z. Fu, D. Pathak, and J. Malik. (2021a). “RMA: Rapid
Motor Adaptation for Legged Robots”. RSS. abs/2107.04034.
Kumar, S., I. Dasgupta, J. D. Cohen, N. D. Daw, and T. L. Grif-
fiths. (2020). “Meta-Learning of Compositional Task Distributions
in Humans and Machines”. In: 4th Workshop on Meta-Learning at
NeurIPS.
Kumar, V. C. V., S. Ha, and C. K. Liu. (2021b). “Error-Aware Policy
Learning:Zero-ShotGeneralizationinPartiallyObservableDynamic
Environments”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems.
Virtual. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2021.XVII.065.
Küttler, H., N. Nardelli, A. Miller, R. Raileanu, M. Selvatici, E. Grefen-
stette, and T. Rocktäschel. (2020). “The nethack learning environ-
ment”. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 33:
7671–7684.
Kveton, B., M. Konobeev, M. Zaheer, C.-W. Hsu, M. Mladenov, C.
Boutilier, and C. Szepesvari. (2021). “Meta-Thompson Sampling”.
In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning. Ed. by M. Meila and T. Zhang. Vol. 139. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research. PMLR. 5884–5893. url: https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v139/kveton21a.html.
Lan, L., Z. Li, X. Guan, and P. Wang. (2019). “Meta reinforcement
learning with task embedding and shared policy”. In: Proceedings
of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
2794–2800.
Lan, Q., A. R. Mahmood, S. Yan, and Z. Xu. (2023). “Learning to Opti-
mize for Reinforcement Learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01470.
362 References
Lange, R. T. and H. Sprekeler. (2020). “Learning not to learn: Nature
versus nurture in silico”. In: 4th Workshop on Meta-Learning at
NeurIPS.
Laskin, M., L. Wang, J. Oh, E. Parisotto, S. Spencer, R. Steigerwald,
D. Strouse, S. Hansen, A. Filos, E. Brooks, et al. (2023). “In-context
reinforcement learning with algorithm distillation”. ICLR.
Lee, B., J. Lee, P. Vrancx, D. Kim, and K.-E. Kim. (2020a). “Batch
reinforcement learning with hyperparameter gradients”. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 5725–5735.
Lee,G.,B.Hou,A.Mandalika,J.Lee,S.Choudhury,andS.S.Srinivasa.
(2019). “Bayesian Policy Optimization for Model Uncertainty”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations. url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=SJGvns0qK7.
Lee, J., A. Xie, A. Pacchiano, Y. Chandak, C. Finn, O. Nachum, and
E. Brunskill. (2024). “Supervised pretraining can learn in-context
reinforcement learning”. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 36.
Lee, K., Y. Seo, S. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin. (2020b). “Context-aware
Dynamics Model for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning”. ICML.
Lee, S. and S.-Y. Chung. (2021). “Improving Generalization in Meta-RL
with Imaginary Tasks from Latent Dynamics Mixture”. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. 34.
Levine, S., A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu. (2020). “Offline reinforce-
ment learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643.
Li, J., T. Lu, X. Cao, Y. Cai, and S. Wang. (2021a). “Meta-imitation
learning by watching video demonstrations”. In: International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Li, K. and J. Malik. (2016). “Learning to optimize”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01885.
Li, K. and J. Malik. (2017). “Learning to Optimize”. ICLR.
References 363
Li, K., A. Gupta, A. Reddy, V. H. Pong, A. Zhou, J. Yu, and S. Levine.
(2021b). “MURAL: Meta-Learning Uncertainty-Aware Rewards for
Outcome-Driven Reinforcement Learning”. In: Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by M.
Meila and T. Zhang. Vol. 139. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR. 6346–6356. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v139/li21g.html.
Li, L., R. Yang, and D. Luo. (2021c). “FOCAL: Efficient Fully-Offline
Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Distance Metric Learning and
BehaviorRegularization”.In:9thInternationalConferenceonLearn-
ing Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7,
2021. OpenReview.net. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
8cpHIfgY4Dj.
Li, Z., F. Zhou, F. Chen, and H. Li. (2017). “Meta-SGD: Learning to
Learn Quickly for Few Shot Learning”. CoRR. abs/1707.09835. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.09835.
Lillicrap, T. P., J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra. (2016). “Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning.” In: ICLR (Poster). url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1509.02971.
Lin, S., J. Wan, T. Xu, Y. Liang, and J. Zhang. (2022). “Model-Based
Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Regularization”. In: In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations. url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=EBn0uInJZWh.
Lin, X., Harjatin, S. Baweja, G. Kantor, and D. Held. (2019). “Adaptive
Auxiliary Task Weighting for Reinforcement Learning”. In: NeurIPS.
Lin, Z., G. Thomas, G. Yang, and T. Ma. (2020a). “Model-based
Adversarial Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems.
Lin, Z., G. Thomas, G. Yang, and T. Ma. (2020b). “Model-based adver-
sarialmeta-reinforcementlearning”.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 33: 10161–10173.
Liotet, P., F. Vidaich, A. M. Metelli, and M. Restelli. (2022). “Lifelong
hyper-policy optimization with multiple importance sampling reg-
ularization”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Vol. 36. No. 7. 7525–7533.
364 References
Liu, B., X. Feng, J. Ren, L. Mai, R. Zhu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y.
Yang. (2022a). “A Theoretical Understanding of Gradient Bias in
Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and
K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=p9zeOtKQXKs.
Liu, B., X. Feng, J. Ren, L. Mai, R. Zhu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, and
Y. Yang. (2022b). “A theoretical understanding of gradient bias
in meta-reinforcement learning”. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 35: 31059–31072.
Liu, E. Z., A. Raghunathan, P. Liang, and C. Finn. (2021). “Decoupling
ExplorationandExploitationforMeta-ReinforcementLearningwith-
out Sacrifices”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR. 6925–6935.
Liu, E. Z., M. P. Stephan, A. Nie, C. J. Piech, E. Brunskill, and C. Finn.
(2022c). “Giving Feedback on Interactive Student Programs with
Meta-Exploration”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.
Liu, H., R. Socher, and C. Xiong. (2019). “Taming maml: Efficient
unbiased meta-reinforcement learning”. In: International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR. 4061–4071.
Lou, B., N. Zhao, and J. Wang. (2021). “Meta-learning from sparse
recovery”. In: Fifth Workshop on Meta-Learning at the Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Lu, C., J. Kuba, A. Letcher, L. Metz, C. Schroeder de Witt, and J.
Foerster. (2022a). “Discovered Policy Optimisation”. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Koyejo, S. Mo-
hamed,A.Agarwal,D.Belgrave,K.Cho,andA.Oh.Vol.35.Curran
Associates, Inc. 16455–16468. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_files/paper/2022/file/688c7a82e31653e7c256c6c29fd3b438-
Paper-Conference.pdf.
Lu, C., T. Willi, A. Letcher, and J. N. Foerster. (2022b). “Adver-
sarial Cheap Talk”. In: Sixth Workshop on Meta-Learning at the
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=VE6FEZc0ppH.
References 365
Lu, C., T. Willi, C. A. S. De Witt, and J. Foerster. (2022c). “Model-
free opponent shaping”. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR. 14398–14411.
Luketina, J., S. Flennerhag, Y. Schroecker, D. Abel, T. Zahavy, and S.
Singh. (2022). “Meta-Gradients in Non-Stationary Environments”.
In: ICLR Workshop on Agent Learning in Open-Endedness. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=SlzBXwZIZ9.
Luna Gutierrez, R. and M. Leonetti. (2020). “Information-theoretic
task selection for meta-reinforcement learning”. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 33: 20532–20542.
Luo, F.-M., S. Jiang, Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, and Y.-F. Zhang. (2022). “Adapt
to environment sudden changes by learning a context sensitive
policy”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence. Vol. 36. No. 7. 7637–7646.
Mandi, Z., P. Abbeel, and S. James. (2022). “On the Effectiveness of
Fine-tuning Versus Meta-RL for Robot Manipulation”. In: CoRL
2022 Workshop on Pre-training Robot Learning.
Mao, J., J. Foerster, T. Rocktäschel, M. Al-Shedivat, G. Farquhar, and
S. Whiteson. (2019). “A baseline for any order gradient estimation
in stochastic computation graphs”. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR. 4343–4351.
Mehta, B., T. Deleu, S. C. Raparthy, C. J. Pal, and L. Paull. (2020).
“Curriculum in Gradient-Based Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In:
Beyond Tabula Rasa in RL Workshop at ICLR.
Meier, R. and A. Mujika. (2022). “Open-Ended Reinforcement Learning
with Neural Reward Functions”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and
K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=NL05_JGVg99.
Melo, L. C. (2022). “Transformers are Meta-Reinforcement Learners”.
Mendonca, R., X. Geng, C. Finn, and S. Levine. (2020). “Meta-
reinforcementlearningrobusttodistributionalshiftviamodelidenti-
ficationandexperiencerelabeling”.arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07178.
Mendonca, R., A. Gupta, R. Kralev, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and C. Finn.
(2019). “Guided Meta-Policy Search”. NeurIPS.
Metz, L., C. D. Freeman, S. S. Schoenholz, and T. Kachman. (2021).
“Gradients are not all you need”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05803.
366 References
Metz, L., N. Maheswaranathan, J. Nixon, D. Freeman, and J. Sohl-
Dickstein. (2019). “Understanding and correcting pathologies in
the training of learned optimizers”. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR. 4556–4565.
Miconi, T., A. Rawal, J. Clune, and K. O. Stanley. (2019). “Back-
propamine: training self-modifying neural networks with differen-
tiable neuromodulated plasticity”. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
r1lrAiA5Ym.
Miconi, T., K. Stanley, and J. Clune. (2018). “Differentiable plasticity:
training plastic neural networks with backpropagation”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed.
by J. Dy and A. Krause. Vol. 80. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR. 3559–3568. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v80/miconi18a.html.
Miki, T., J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter.
(2022). “Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal
robots in the wild”. Science Robotics. 7(62): eabk2822.
Mishra, N.,M. Rohaninejad,X. Chen,and P.Abbeel. (2018). “ASimple
Neural Attentive Meta-Learner”. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
B1DmUzWAW.
Mitchell, E., R. Rafailov, X. B. Peng, S. Levine, and C. Finn. (2020).
“Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Advantage Weighting”.
CoRR. abs/2008.06043. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.06043.
Mitchell, E., R. Rafailov, X. B. Peng, S. Levine, and C. Finn. (2021).
“Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Advantage Weighting”.
In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning. Ed. by M. Meila and T. Zhang. Vol. 139. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research. PMLR. 7780–7791. url: https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v139/mitchell21a.html.
Mnih, V., A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu. (2016). “Asynchronous methods
for deep reinforcement learning”. In: International conference on
machine learning. PMLR. 1928–1937.
References 367
Moreno, P., J. Humplik, G. Papamakarios, B. A. Pires, L. Buesing,
N. Heess, and T. Weber. (2018). “Neural belief states for partially
observed domains”. In: NeurIPS 2018 workshop on reinforcement
learning under partial observability.
Mu, Y., Y. Zhuang, F. Ni, B. Wang, J. Chen, J. Hao, and P. Luo.
(2022). “DOMINO: Decomposed Mutual Information Optimization
for Generalized Context in Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=CJGUABT_COm.
Mutti, M., M. Mancassola, and M. Restelli. (2022). “Unsupervised
reinforcement learning in multiple environments”. In: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 36. No. 7.
7850–7858.
Nagabandi, A., I. Clavera, S. Liu, R. S. Fearing, P. Abbeel, S. Levine,
and C. Finn. (2019a). “Learning to Adapt in Dynamic, Real-World
Environments through Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Nagabandi, A., I. Clavera, S. Liu, R. S. Fearing, P. Abbeel, S. Levine,
and C. Finn. (2019b). “Learning to Adapt in Dynamic, Real-World
Environments through Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://
openreview.net/forum?id=HyztsoC5Y7.
Nagabandi, A., C. Finn, and S. Levine. (2019c). “Deep Online Learning
Via Meta-Learning: Continual Adaptation for Model-Based RL”.
In: International Conference on Learning Representations. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyxAfnA5tm.
Najarro, E. and S. Risi. (2020). “Meta-Learning through Hebbian Plas-
ticity in Random Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Had-
sell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin. Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc.
20719–20731. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
ee23e7ad9b473ad072d57aaa9b2a5222-Paper.pdf.
368 References
Nguyen, H. H., A. Baisero, D. Wang, C. Amato, and R. Platt. (2022).
“Leveraging Fully Observable Policies for Learning under Partial
Observability”. In: 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=pn-HOPBioUE.
Ni, T., B. Eysenbach, and R. Salakhutdinov. (2022). “Recurrent Model-
Free RL Can Be a Strong Baseline for Many POMDPs”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Nichol, A., J. Achiam, and J. Schulman. (2018a). “On first-order meta-
learning algorithms”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999.
Nichol, A., V. Pfau, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, and J. Schulman. (2018b).
“Gotta learn fast: A new benchmark for generalization in rl”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03720.
Oh, J., V. Chockalingam, S. P. Singh, and H. Lee. (2016). “Control of
Memory, Active Perception, and Action in Minecraft”. ICML.
Oh,J.,M.Hessel,W.M.Czarnecki,Z.Xu,H.vanHasselt,S.Singh,and
D. Silver. (2020). “Discovering reinforcement learning algorithms”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08794.
Packer, C., P. Abbeel, and J. E. Gonzalez. (2021). “Hindsight
Task Relabelling: Experience Replay for Sparse Reward Meta-
RL”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
url: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2021 / file /
1454ca2270599546dfcd2a3700e4d2f1-Paper.pdf.
Paine, T. L., S. G. Colmenarejo, Z. Wang, S. Reed, Y. Aytar, T. Pfaff,
M. W. Hoffman, G. Barth-Maron, S. Cabi, D. Budden, et al. (2018).
“One-shot high-fidelity imitation: Training large-scale deep nets with
rl”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05017.
Papoudakis, G. and S. V. Albrecht. (2020). “Variational Autoencoders
for Opponent Modeling in Multi-Agent Systems”. In: AAAI 2020
Workshop on Reinforcement Learning in Games.
Parisotto, E., H. F. Song, J. W. Rae, R. Pascanu, Ç. Gülçehre, S. M.
Jayakumar, M. Jaderberg, R. L. Kaufman, A. Clark, S. Noury,
M. M. Botvinick, N. Heess, and R. Hadsell. (2020). “Stabilizing
Transformers for Reinforcement Learning”. ICML.
Park, E. and J. B. Oliva. (2019). “Meta-Curvature”. NeurIPS.
References 369
Park, S., O. Rybkin, and S. Levine. (2024). “METRA: Scalable Un-
supervised RL with Metric-Aware Abstraction”. In: The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations. url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=c5pwL0Soay.
Parker-Holder, J., R. Rajan, X. Song, A. Biedenkapp, Y. Miao, T.
Eimer, B. Zhang, V. Nguyen, R. Calandra, A. Faust, et al. (2022).
“Automated Reinforcement Learning (AutoRL): A Survey and Open
Problems”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03916.
Pascanu, R., T. Mikolov, and Y. Bengio. (2013). “On the difficulty of
training recurrent neural networks”. ICML.
Peng, M., B. Zhu, and J. Jiao. (2021). “Linear Representation Meta-
Reinforcement Learning for Instant Adaptation”. url: https://
openreview.net/forum?id=lNrtNGkr-vw.
Perez, C., F. P. Such, and T. Karaletsos. (2020). “Generalized hidden
parameter mdps: Transferable model-based rl in a handful of trials”.
In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Vol. 34. No. 04. 5403–5411.
Polydoros,A.S.andL.Nalpantidis.(2017).“Surveyofmodel-basedrein-
forcement learning: Applications on robotics”. Journal of Intelligent
& Robotic Systems. 86(2): 153–173.
Pong, V. H., A. V. Nair, L. M. Smith, C. Huang, and S. Levine. (2022).
“Offline meta-reinforcement learning with online self-supervision”.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 17811–
17829.
Prat, A. and E. Johns. (2021). “PERIL: Probabilistic Embeddings for
hybrid Meta-Reinforcement and Imitation Learning”. url: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=BIIwfP55pp.
Rafailov, R., V. K. Vijay, T. Yu, A. Singh, M. Phielipp, and C. Finn.
(2021). “The Reflective Explorer: Online Meta-Exploration from
Offline Data in Realistic Robotic Tasks”. In: Deep RL Workshop
NeurIPS 2021.
Raghu, A., M. Raghu, S. Bengio, and O. Vinyals. (2020). “Rapid Learn-
ing or Feature Reuse? Towards Understanding the Effectiveness of
MAML”. ICLR.
Raileanu, R., M. Goldstein, A. Szlam, and R. Fergus. (2020). “Fast
Adaptation via Policy-Dynamics Value Functions”. ICML.
370 References
Rajendran, J., R. Lewis, V. Veeriah, H. Lee, and S. Singh. (2020). “How
Should an Agent Practice?” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. 34(04): 5454–5461. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.
5995.
Rakelly, K., A. Zhou, C. Finn, S. Levine, and D. Quillen. (2019). “Effi-
cient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context
variables”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR.
5331–5340.
Raparthy, S. C., E. Hambro, R. Kirk, M. Henaff, and R. Raileanu.
(2023). “Generalization to New Sequential Decision Making Tasks
with In-Context Learning”. NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Foundation
Models for Decision Making.
Ravi, S. and H. Larochelle. (2017). “Optimization as a Model for Few-
Shot Learning”. In: ICLR.
Rechenberg, I. (1971). “Evolutionsstrategie: Optimierung technischer
Systeme nach Prinzipien der biologischen Evolution. Dr.-Ing”. PhD
thesis. Thesis, Technical University of Berlin, Department of Process
Engineering.
Ren, A. Z., B. Govil, T.-Y. Yang, K. R. Narasimhan, and A. Majumdar.
(2022a). “Leveraging Language for Accelerated Learning of Tool
Manipulation”. In: 6th Annual Conference on Robot Learning. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=nPw7jaGBrCG.
Ren, Z., A. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Peng, and J. Ma. (2022b). “Efficient Meta
Reinforcement Learning for Preference-based Fast Adaptation”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H.
Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=61UwgeIotn.
Rengarajan, D., S. Chaudhary, J. Kim, D. Kalathil, and S. Shakkottai.
(2022).“EnhancedMetaReinforcementLearningviaDemonstrations
in Sparse Reward Environments”. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave,
and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=kCtnkLv-
_W0.
References 371
Co-Reyes, J. D., S. Feng, G. Berseth, J. Qui, and S. Levine. (2021a).
“AcceleratingOnlineReinforcementLearningviaModel-BasedMeta-
Learning”. In: Learning to Learn - Workshop at ICLR 2021. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=XCJ5PEkuMkC.
Co-Reyes, J. D., Y. Miao, D. Peng, E. Real, Q. V. Le, S. Levine, H.
Lee, and A. Faust. (2021b). “Evolving Reinforcement Learning Algo-
rithms”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations.
url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=0XXpJ4OtjW.
Riemer,M.,I.Cases,R.Ajemian,M.Liu,I.Rish,Y.Tu,andG.Tesauro.
(2019).“LearningtoLearnwithoutForgettingByMaximizingTrans-
fer and Minimizing Interference”. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
B1gTShAct7.
Rimon, Z., A. Tamar, and G. Adler. (2022). “Meta Reinforcement
Learning with Finite Training Tasks - a Density Estimation Ap-
proach”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Y-sdZLIi9R9.
Ritter, S., R. Faulkner, L. Sartran, A. Santoro, M. Botvinick, and
D. Raposo. (2021). “Rapid Task-Solving in Novel Environments”.
In: International Conference on Learning Representations. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=F-mvpFpn_0q.
Ritter, S., J. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, S. Jayakumar, C. Blundell, R.
Pascanu, and M. Botvinick. (2018a). “Been There, Done That:
Meta-Learning with Episodic Recall”. In: ICML.
Ritter, S., J. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, S. Jayakumar, C. Blundell, R.
Pascanu, and M. Botvinick. (2018b). “Been There, Done That:
Meta-Learning with Episodic Recall”. In: Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by J. Dy and A.
Krause. Vol. 80. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR.
4354–4363. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ritter18a.html.
Rohani, S. R. R., S. Hedayatian, and M. S. Baghshah. (2022). “BIMRL:
Brain Inspired Meta Reinforcement Learning”. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE. 9048–9053.
372 References
Rothfuss, J., D. Lee, I. Clavera, T. Asfour, and P. Abbeel. (2019).
“ProMP: Proximal Meta-Policy Search”. In: International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=SkxXCi0qFX.
Sæmundsson, S., K. Hofmann, and M. P. Deisenroth. (2018). “Meta re-
inforcement learning with latent variable gaussian processes”. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.07551.
Salimans, T., J. Ho, X. Chen, S. Sidor, and I. Sutskever. (2017). “Evo-
lution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864.
Santoro, A., S. Bartunov, M. Botvinick, D. Wierstra, and T. Lillicrap.
(2016). “Meta-learning with memory-augmented neural networks”.
In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 1842–
1850.
Schmidhuber,J.(1987).“Evolutionaryprinciplesinself-referentiallearn-
ing,oronlearninghowtolearn:themeta-meta-...hook”.PhD thesis.
Technische Universität München.
Schmidhuber, J. (2007). “Gödel machines: Fully self-referential optimal
universal self-improvers”. In: Artificial general intelligence. Springer.
199–226.
Schmidhuber, J., J. Zhao, and M. Wiering. (1997). “Shifting induc-
tive bias with success-story algorithm, adaptive Levin search, and
incremental self-improvement”. Machine Learning. 28(1): 105–130.
Schmitt, S., M. Hessel, and K. Simonyan. (2020). “Off-policy actor-
critic with shared experience replay”. In: International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR. 8545–8554.
Schoettler, G., A. Nair, J. A. Ojea, S. Levine, and E. Solowjow. (2020).
“Meta-reinforcement learning for robotic industrial insertion tasks”.
In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). IEEE. 9728–9735.
Schulman, J., F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov.
(2017). “Proximal policy optimization algorithms”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347.
Schwartzwald, A. and N. Papanikolopoulos. (2020). “Sim-to-Real with
Domain Randomization for Tumbling Robot Control”. In: IROS.
References 373
Seo, Y., D. Hafner, H. Liu, F. Liu, S. James, K. Lee, and P. Abbeel.
(2022). “Masked World Models for Visual Control”. In: 6th Annual
Conference on Robot Learning. url: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=Bf6on28H0Jv.
Seyed Ghasemipour, S. K., S. ( Gu, and R. Zemel. (2019). “SMILe:
Scalable Meta Inverse Reinforcement Learning through Context-
Conditional Policies”. In: Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d’Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett. Vol. 32. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
2b8f621e9244cea5007bac8f5d50e476-Paper.pdf.
Shala, G., S. P. Arango, A. Biedenkapp, F. Hutter, and J. Grabocka.
(2022). “AutoRL-Bench 1.0”. In: Sixth Workshop on Meta-Learning
at the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=RyAl60VhTcG.
Sharaf, A. and H. Daumé III. (2021). “Meta-Learning Effective Explo-
ration Strategies for Contextual Bandits”. Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence: 9541–9548.
Al-Shedivat, M., T. Bansal, Y. Burda, I. Sutskever, I. Mordatch, and
P. Abbeel. (2018a). “Continuous Adaptation via Meta-Learning in
Nonstationary and Competitive Environments”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Sk2u1g-0-.
Al-Shedivat, M., T. Bansal, Y. Burda, I. Sutskever, I. Mordatch, and
P. Abbeel. (2018b). “Continuous Adaptation via Meta-Learning in
Nonstationary and Competitive Environments”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Shin, J., A. Hakobyan, M. Park, Y. Kim, G. Kim, and I. Yang. (2022).
“Infusing model predictive control into meta-reinforcement learning
for mobile robots in dynamic environments”. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters. 7(4): 10065–10072.
Silver, D., A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van Den
Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M.
Lanctot, et al. (2016). “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural
networks and tree search”. nature. 529(7587): 484–489.
374 References
Simchowitz, M., C. Tosh, A. Krishnamurthy, D. J. Hsu, T. Lykouris, M.
Dudik, and R. E. Schapire. (2021). “Bayesian decision-making under
misspecified priors with applications to meta-learning”. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. 34: 26382–26394.
Singh, A., E. Jang, A. Irpan, D. Kappler, M. Dalal, S. Levinev, M.
Khansari, and C. Finn. (2020). “Scalable multi-task imitation learn-
ing with autonomous improvement”. In: 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2167–2173.
Singh, S., R. L. Lewis, and A. G. Barto. (2009). “Where do rewards
come from”. In: Proceedings of the annual conference of the cognitive
science society. Cognitive Science Society. 2601–2606.
Snell, J., K. Swersky, and R. Zemel. (2017). “Prototypical Networks for
Few-shot Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. Ed. by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett.
Sohn, S., H. Woo, J. Choi, and H. Lee. (2020). “Meta Reinforcement
Learning with Autonomous Inference of Subtask Dependencies”.
In: International Conference on Learning Representations. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HkgsWxrtPB.
Song, X., W. Gao, Y. Yang, K. Choromanski, A. Pacchiano, and Y.
Tang. (2020a). “ES-MAML: Simple Hessian-Free Meta Learning”.
In: International Conference on Learning Representations. url:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1exA2NtDB.
Song, X., Y. Yang, K. Choromanski, K. Caluwaerts, W. Gao, C. Finn,
and J. Tan. (2020b). “Rapidly Adaptable Legged Robots via Evolu-
tionary Meta-Learning”. IROS.
Stadie, B. C., G. Yang, R. Houthooft, X. Chen, Y. Duan, Y. Wu, P.
Abbeel, and I. Sutskever. (2018). “Some Considerations on Learning
to Explore via Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. NeurIPS.
Staley, E. W., C. Ashcraft, B. Stoler, J. Markowitz, G. Vallabha, C.
Ratto,andK.D.Katyal.(2021).“MetaArcade:AConfigurableEnvi-
ronment Suite for Meta-Learning”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00583.
Stone, P., G. A. Kaminka, S. Kraus, and J. S. Rosenschein. (2010).
“Ad Hoc Autonomous Agent Teams: Collaboration without Pre-
Coordination”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
References 375
Subramanian, J., A. Sinha, R. Seraj, and A. Mahajan. (2022). “Approx-
imate information state for approximate planning and reinforcement
learning in partially observed systems”. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research. 23(1): 483–565.
Sung, F., Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. S. Torr, and T. M.
Hospedales. (2018). “Learning to Compare: Relation Network for
Few-Shot Learning”. CVPR.
Sung, F., L. Zhang, T. Xiang, T. M. Hospedales, and Y. Yang. (2017).
“LearningtoLearn:Meta-CriticNetworksforSampleEfficientLearn-
ing”. CoRR. abs/1706.09529. arXiv: 1706.09529. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1706.09529.
Sutskever, I. (2013). Training recurrent neural networks. University of
Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.
Sutton,R.S.(1992).“Adaptingbiasbygradientdescent:Anincremental
version of delta-bar-delta”. In: AAAI. San Jose, CA. 171–176.
Tack, J., J. Park, H. Lee, J. Lee, and J. Shin. (2022). “Meta-Learning
with Self-Improving Momentum Target”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D.
Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
FCNMbF_TsKm.
Tamar, A., D. Soudry, and E. Zisselman. (2022). “Regularization guar-
antees generalization in bayesian reinforcement learning through
algorithmic stability”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 36. No. 8. 8423–8431.
Tang, Y. (2022). “Biased Gradient Estimate with Drastic Variance
Reduction for Meta Reinforcement Learning”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 21050–21075.
Tang, Y., T. Kozuno, M. Rowland, R. Munos, and M. Valko. (2021).
“Unifying gradient estimators for meta-reinforcement learning via
off-policy evaluation”. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 34: 5303–5315.
Team, A. A., J. Bauer, K. Baumli, S. Baveja, F. Behbahani, A. Bhoopc-
hand, N. Bradley-Schmieg, M. Chang, N. Clay, A. Collister, et
al. (2023). “Human-Timescale Adaptation in an Open-Ended Task
Space”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.07608.
376 References
Teh, Y., V. Bapst, W. M. Czarnecki, J. Quan, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Had-
sell, N. Heess, and R. Pascanu. (2017). “Distral: Robust multitask
reinforcement learning”. Advances in neural information processing
systems. 30.
Tessera,K.-a.A.,A.Rahman,andS.V.Albrecht.(2024).“HyperMARL:
Adaptive Hypernetworks for Multi-Agent RL”.
Thompson, W. R. (1933). “On the likelihood that one unknown prob-
ability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples”.
Biometrika. 25(3-4): 285–294.
Thrun, S. and L. Pratt. (1998). “Learning to learn: Introduction and
overview”. In: Learning to learn. Springer. 3–17.
Todorov, E., T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. (2012). “Mujoco: A physics en-
gine for model-based control”. In: 2012 IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems. IEEE. 5026–5033.
Touati, A. and Y. Ollivier. (2021). “Learning one representation to
optimize all rewards”. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. 34: 13–23.
Triantafillou, E., T. Zhu, V. Dumoulin, P. Lamblin, U. Evci, K. Xu,
R. Goroshin, C. Gelada, K. Swersky, P.-A. Manzagol, et al. (2020).
“Meta-dataset: A dataset of datasets for learning to learn from few
examples”. International Conference on Learning Representations.
Tripuraneni,N.,C.Jin,andM.Jordan.(2021).“Provablemeta-learning
of linear representations”. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR. 10434–10443.
Valiant, L. G. (1984). “A theory of the learnable”. Communications of
the ACM. 27(11): 1134–1142.
Vanschoren, J. (2018). “Meta-learning: A survey”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.03548.
Vaswani,A.,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. (2017). “Attention Is All You Need”.
NeurIPS.
Vázquez-Canteli, J. R., S. Dey, G. Henze, and Z. Nagy. (2020).
“CityLearn: Standardizing research in multi-agent reinforcement
learningfordemandresponseandurbanenergymanagement”.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.10504.
References 377
Vázquez-Canteli, J. R. and Z. Nagy. (2019). “Reinforcement learning for
demand response: A review of algorithms and modeling techniques”.
Applied energy. 235: 1072–1089.
Veeriah, V., M. Hessel, Z. Xu, J. Rajendran, R. L. Lewis, J. Oh, H. P.
van Hasselt, D. Silver, and S. Singh. (2019). “Discovery of Useful
Questions as Auxiliary Tasks”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelz-
imer, F. d’Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett. Vol. 32. Curran
Associates, Inc. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/
file/10ff0b5e85e5b85cc3095d431d8c08b4-Paper.pdf.
Veeriah, V., T. Zahavy, M. Hessel, Z. Xu, J. Oh, I. Kemaev, H. P.
van Hasselt, D. Silver, and S. Singh. (2021). “Discovery of Options
via Meta-Learned Subgoals”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems.Ed.byM.Ranzato,A.Beygelzimer,Y.Dauphin,
P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan. Vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc.
29861–29873. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
fa246d0262c3925617b0c72bb20eeb1d-Paper.pdf.
Vinyals, O., C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, k. kavukcuoglu koray, and D.
Wierstra. (2016). “Matching Networks for One Shot Learning”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Vuorio, R., J. A. Beck, G. Farquhar, J. N. Foerster, and S. Whiteson.
(2021). “No DICE: An Investigation of the Bias-Variance Tradeoff
in Meta-Gradients”. In: Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021.
Vuorio, R., S.-H. Sun, H. Hu, and J. Lim. (2019). “Multimodal Model-
Agnostic Meta-Learning via Task-Aware Modulation”. In: NeurIPS.
Walke, H. R., J. H. Yang, A. Yu, A. Kumar, J. Orbik, A. Singh, and
S. Levine. (2022). “Don’t Start From Scratch: Leveraging Prior
Data to Automate Robotic Reinforcement Learning”. In: 6th Annual
Conference on Robot Learning. url: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=WbdaYyDkNZL.
Wan, M., J. Peng, and T. Gangwani. (2022). “Hindsight Foresight
Relabeling for Meta-Reinforcement Learning”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=P7OVkHEoHOZ.
378 References
Wang, H., J. Zhou, and X. He. (2020a). “Learning Context-aware
Task Reasoning for Efficient Meta Reinforcement Learning”. In:
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 1440–1448.
Wang,J.X.,Z.Kurth-Nelson,D.Kumaran,D.Tirumala,H.Soyer,J.Z.
Leibo, D. Hassabis, and M. Botvinick. (2018). “Prefrontal cortex as
a meta-reinforcement learning system”. Nature neuroscience. 21(6):
860–868.
Wang, J. X., Z. Kurth-Nelson, D. Tirumala, H. Soyer, J. Z. Leibo,
R. Munos, C. Blundell, D. Kumaran, and M. Botvinick. (2016).
“Learning to reinforcement learn”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763.
Wang, J. X., M. King, N. Porcel, Z. Kurth-Nelson, T. Zhu, C. Deck, P.
Choy, M. Cassin, M. Reynolds, H. F. Song, G. Buttimore, D. P. Re-
ichert, N. C. Rabinowitz, L. Matthey, D. Hassabis, A. Lerchner, and
M. M. Botvinick. (2021). “Alchemy: A structured task distribution
for meta-reinforcement learning”. NeurIPS.
Wang, Q. and H. van Hoof. (2022). “Learning Expressive Meta-
Representations with Mixture of Expert Neural Processes”. In: Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=ju38DG3sbg6.
Wang, Q., Y. Lv, Y. Feng, Z. Xie, and J. Huang. (2023). “A Simple
Yet Effective Strategy to Robustify the Meta Learning Paradigm”.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Wang, Q. and H. Van Hoof. (2022). “Model-based Meta Reinforcement
Learning using Graph Structured Surrogate Models and Amortized
Policy Search”. In: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
on Machine Learning.
Wang,Y.,Q.Yao,J.T.Kwok,andL.M.Ni.(2020b).“Generalizingfrom
a few examples: A survey on few-shot learning”. ACM computing
surveys (csur). 53(3): 1–34.
Wang, Z., Y. Zhao, P. Yu, R. Zhang, and C. Chen. (2020c). “Bayesian
Meta Sampling for Fast Uncertainty Adaptation”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Bkxv90EKPB.
References 379
Weihs, L., U. Jain, I.-J. Liu, J. Salvador, S. Lazebnik, A. Kembhavi,
and A. Schwing. (2021). “Bridging the Imitation Gap by Adaptive
Insubordination”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems. Ed. by A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W.
Vaughan. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Wlx0DqiUTD_.
Wen, L., S. Zhang, H. E. Tseng, B. Singh, D. Filev, and H. Peng. (2022).
“Improved Robustness and Safety for Pre-Adaptation of Meta Rein-
forcement Learning with Prior Regularization”. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE. 8987–8994.
Wierstra, D., T. Schaul, T. Glasmachers, Y. Sun, J. Peters, and J.
Schmidhuber. (2014). “Natural evolution strategies”. The Journal
of Machine Learning Research. 15(1): 949–980.
Williams, R. J. (1992). “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms
for connectionist reinforcement learning”. Machine learning. 8(3):
229–256.
Woo, H., G. Yoo, and M. Yoo. (2022). “Structure Learning-Based
Task Decomposition for Reinforcement Learning in Non-stationary
Environments”.In:Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Vol. 36. No. 8. 8657–8665.
Wu, B., F. Xu, Z. He, A. Gupta, and P. K. Allen. (2020). “SQUIRL:
Robust and Efficient Learning from Video Demonstration of Long-
Horizon Robotic Manipulation Tasks”. In: IROS.
Wu, Y., X. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, and K. W. Ross. (2022). “Ag-
gressive Q-Learning with Ensembles: Achieving Both High Sample
Efficiency and High Asymptotic Performance”. In: Deep Reinforce-
ment Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=L9MhPPvPFS.
Wu, Y., M. Ren, R. Liao, and R. Grosse. (2018). “Understanding Short-
Horizon Bias in Stochastic Meta-Optimization”. In: International
Conference on Learning Representations. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=H1MczcgR-.
Xian,Z.,S.Lal,H.-Y.Tung,E.A.Platanios,andK.Fragkiadaki.(2021).
“HyperDynamics: Meta-Learning Object and Agent Dynamics with
Hypernetworks”. In: International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=pHXfe1cOmA.
380 References
Xie, A., A. Singh, S. Levine, and C. Finn. (2018). “Few-shot goal
inference for visuomotor learning and planning”. In: Conference on
Robot Learning. PMLR. 40–52.
Xiong,Z.,L.M.Zintgraf,J.A.Beck,R.Vuorio,andS.Whiteson.(2021).
“On the Practical Consistency of Meta-Reinforcement Learning
Algorithms”.In:FifthWorkshoponMeta-LearningattheConference
on Neural Information Processing Systems. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=xwQgKphwhFA.
Xu, K., E. Ratner, A. Dragan, S. Levine, and C. Finn. (2019). “Learn-
ing a Prior over Intent via Meta-Inverse Reinforcement Learning”.
In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Xu, M., Y. Shen, S. Zhang, Y. Lu, D. Zhao, J. Tenenbaum, and C.
Gan. (2022). “Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy
generalization”. In: international conference on machine learning.
PMLR. 24631–24645.
Xu, Z., H. P. van Hasselt, M. Hessel, J. Oh, S. Singh, and D. Sil-
ver. (2020). “Meta-Gradient Reinforcement Learning with an Ob-
jective Discovered Online”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Had-
sell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin. Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc.
15254–15264. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
ae3d525daf92cee0003a7f2d92c34ea3-Paper.pdf.
Xu, Z., H. P. van Hasselt, and D. Silver. (2018). “Meta-Gradient Re-
inforcement Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. Ed. by S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K.
Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett. Vol. 31. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
2715518c875999308842e3455eda2fe3-Paper.pdf.
Yan, L., D. Liu, Y. Song, and C. Yu. (2020). “Multimodal Aggregation
Approach for Memory Vision-Voice Indoor Navigation with Meta-
Learning”. In: IROS.
Yang, J., E. Wang, R. Trivedi, T. Zhao, and H. Zha. (2022). “Adaptive
Incentive Design with Multi-Agent Meta-Gradient Reinforcement
Learning”. AAMAS.
References 381
Yang, J., W. Hu, J. D. Lee, and S. S. Du. (2020). “Impact of represen-
tation learning in linear bandits”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.06531.
Yang,Y.,K.Caluwaerts,A.Iscen,J.Tan,andC.Finn.(2019).“NoRML:
No-Reward Meta Learning”. AAMAS.
Ye, H., X. Chen, L. Wang, and S. S. Du. (2023). “On the power of
pre-training for generalization in rl: Provable benefits and hardness”.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 39770–
39800.
Yin, H., J. Chen, S. J. Pan, and S. Tschiatschek. (2021). “Sequential
generative exploration model for partially observable reinforcement
learning”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Vol. 35. No. 12. 10700–10708.
Yoon, J., T. Kim, O. Dia, S. Kim, Y. Bengio, and S. Ahn. (2018).
“Bayesian Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H.
Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett. Vol. 31.
Curran Associates, Inc. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
2018/file/e1021d43911ca2c1845910d84f40aeae-Paper.pdf.
Yu, L., T. Yu, C. Finn, and S. Ermon. (2019). “Meta-Inverse Reinforce-
ment Learning with Probabilistic Context Variables”. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach, H.
Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett.
Vol.32.CurranAssociates,Inc.url:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2019/file/30de24287a6d8f07b37c716ad51623a7-Paper.pdf.
Yu, T., C. Finn, S. Dasari, A. Xie, T. Zhang, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine.
(2018). “One-Shot Imitation from Observing Humans via Domain-
Adaptive Meta-Learning”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2018.XIV.
002.
Yu,T.,D.Quillen,Z.He,R.Julian,K.Hausman,C.Finn,andS.Levine.
(2020a). “Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task
andmetareinforcementlearning”.In:Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR. 1094–1100.
Yu, W., J. Tan, Y. Bai, E. Coumans, and S. Ha. (2020b). “Learning
fast adaptation with meta strategy optimization”. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters. 5(2): 2950–2957.
382 References
Yu, W., J. Tan, C. K. Liu, and G. Turk. (2017). “Preparing for the
Unknown:LearningaUniversalPolicywithOnlineSystemIdentifica-
tion”. In: Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems. Cambridge,
Massachusetts. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2017.XIII.048.
Yuan,H.andZ.Lu.(2022).“Robusttaskrepresentationsforofflinemeta-
reinforcement learning via contrastive learning”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 25747–25759.
Zahavy, T., Z. Xu, V. Veeriah, M. Hessel, J. Oh, H. van Hasselt, D.
Silver, and S. Singh. (2020). “A self-tuning actor-critic algorithm”.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12928.
Zang,X.,H.Yao,G.Zheng,N.Xu,K.Xu,andZ.Li.(2020).“Metalight:
Value-based meta-reinforcement learning for traffic signal control”.
In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Vol. 34. No. 01. 1153–1160.
Zhang, H. and Z. Kan. (2022). “Temporal logic guided meta q-learning
of multiple tasks”. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. 7(3):
8194–8201.
Zhang, J., J. Wang, H. Hu, T. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Fan, and C.
Zhang. (2021). “MetaCURE: Meta Reinforcement Learning with
Empowerment-Driven Exploration”. In: Proceedings of the 38th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning.Ed.byM.MeilaandT.
Zhang. Vol. 139. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR.
12600–12610. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/zhang21w.
html.
Zhang, Q. and D. Chen. (2021). “A Meta-Gradient Approach to Learn-
ing Cooperative Multi-Agent Communication Topology”. In: Fifth
Workshop on Meta-Learning at the Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.
Zhao, M., P. Abbeel, and S. James. (2022a). “On the Effectiveness
of Fine-tuning Versus Meta-reinforcement Learning”. In: Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by A. H. Oh, A.
Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho. url: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=mux7gn3g_3.
References 383
Zhao, T. Z., J. Luo, O. Sushkov, R. Pevceviciute, N. Heess, J. Scholz,
S. Schaal, and S. Levine. (2022b). “Offline meta-reinforcement learn-
ing for industrial insertion”. In: 2022 International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 6386–6393.
Zhao, W., J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund. (2020). “Sim-to-real
transfer in deep reinforcement learning for robotics: a survey”. In:
2020 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI).
IEEE. 737–744.
Zhao, Z., A. Nagabandi, K. Rakelly, C. Finn, and S. Levine. (2021).
“MELD:Meta-ReinforcementLearningfromImagesviaLatentState
Models”. In: Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR. 1246–1261.
Zheng, Z., J. Oh, M. Hessel, Z. Xu, M. Kroiss, H. Van Hasselt, D. Silver,
and S. Singh. (2020). “What can learned intrinsic rewards capture?”
In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 11436–
11446.
Zheng, Z., J. Oh, and S. Singh. (2018). “On Learning Intrinsic Rewards
for Policy Gradient Methods”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Ed. by S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett. Vol. 31. Curran
Associates, Inc. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
file/51de85ddd068f0bc787691d356176df9-Paper.pdf.
Zhou, A., E. Jang, D. Kappler, A. Herzog, M. Khansari, P. Wohlhart,
Y. Bai, M. Kalakrishnan, S. Levine, and C. Finn. (2020). “Watch,
Try, Learn: Meta-Learning from Demonstrations and Rewards”. In:
ICLR.
Zhou, W., L. Pinto, and A. Gupta. (2019). “Environment Probing
Interaction Policies”. In: International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=ryl8-3AcFX.
Zintgraf, L., S. Devlin, K. Ciosek, S. Whiteson, and K. Hofmann.
(2021a). “Deep Interactive Bayesian Reinforcement Learning via
Meta-Learning”.In:Proceedingsofthe20thInternationalConference
on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems. 1712–1714.
Zintgraf, L., S. Schulze, C. Lu, L. Feng, M. Igl, K. Shiarlis, Y. Gal,
K. Hofmann, and S. Whiteson. (2021b). “VariBAD: Variational
Bayes-Adaptive Deep RL via Meta-Learning”. Journal of Machine
Learning Research. 22(289): 1–39.
384 References
Zintgraf, L., K. Shiarlis, M. Igl, S. Schulze, Y. Gal, K. Hofmann, and
S. Whiteson. (2020). “VariBAD: A Very Good Method for Bayes-
Adaptive Deep RL via Meta-Learning”. In: International Conference
on Learning Representation (ICLR).
Zintgraf, L. M., L. Feng, C. Lu, M. Igl, K. Hartikainen, K. Hofmann,
and S. Whiteson. (2021c). “Exploration in Approximate Hyper-
State Space for Meta Reinforcement Learning”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 12991–13001.
Zintgraf, L. M., K. Shiarlis, V. Kurin, K. Hofmann, and S. Whiteson.
(2019). “Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning”. ICLR.
Zou, H., T. Ren, D. Yan, H. Su, and J. Zhu. (2021). “Learning task-
distribution reward shaping with meta-learning”. In: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 35. No. 12.
11210–11218.
Zou, Y. and X. Lu. (2020). “Gradient-EM Bayesian Meta-Learning”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H.
Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin. Vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc. 20865–20875. url: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/ef48e3ef07e359006f7869b04fa07f5e-
Paper.pdf.
