4202
rpA
21
]RI.sc[
1v82680.4042:viXra
Accessibility in Information Retrieval
Leif Azzopardi1 and Vishwa Vinay2
1 Dept.of Computing Science,
Universityof Glasgow,
Glasgow UK,
leif@dcs.gla.ac.uk,
2 Microsoft Research Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
vvinay@microsoft.com
Abstract. This paper introduces the concept of accessibility from the
field of transportation planning and adopts it within the context of In-
formation Retrieval(IR).Ananalogy isdrawnbetweenthefields,which
motivates the development of document accessibility measures for IR
systems. Considering the accessibility of documents within a collection
given an IR System provides a different perspective on theanalysis and
evaluation of such systems which could be used to inform the design,
tuningand management of current and futureIR systems.
Keywords: Fairness, Bias, Equality, Accessibility, Retrievability
1 Introduction
InformationRetrievalistheareathatdealswiththestorage,organization,man-
agement and retrieval of information, where the goal of continual research in
the field is to find better methods of doing the same. In pursuit of this better-
mentevaluationhasbeeninstrumentalinthedevelopmentofIRSystems.While
evaluationhas typicallyfocusedonthe effectiveness[14],orthe efficiency [16]of
the IR system, these are only two ways in which to assess the quality of an IR
system. In this paper, we introduce a complementary view to evaluation which
provides a higher level view of the IR system by focusing on the accessibility an
IR system provides to the documents in a collection.
Accessibility is an abstract concept coined almost 50 years ago in the land
use andtransportationplanning field [10], whereit wasdefined asa measureof
potential opportunities for interaction with resources like employment, school-
ing, shopping, dining, etc. Measuring the accessibility in this context enabled
many studies (e.g. [10][12][15][7]) to be performed which examined, for exam-
ple, how changes in the levels of accessibility to such opportunities affected the
urban area (in terms of economic impact, social changes and so forth). The re-
sultsofsuchstudiesprovidevaluableinformationtotransportationplannersand
city designers in the development of land use and transportation systems. Be-
fore this, planners and designers would focus on measures which were based on
the effectiveness and efficiency of the transportationsystem (such as, the travel
time between particular locations). However, accessibility provided a different
perspective, and while related to effectiveness and efficiency, it takes a more
abstracted or high level view on the evaluation of transportation systems, con-
sidering more generalconcerns relating to access, instead of focusing on specific
instances.
Their definition of accessibility3 considers the accessibility of opportunities
atlocationsinaphysicalspace(suchasacity).Thetransportationsystemisthe
means by which opportunities are made accessible (i.e., the road network and
the bus, cycle path and a bicycle, etc). In this context, the main consideration
in the design and management of the transportation system is to look beyond
efficiencyandeffectivenessandtoconsidertheaccessibilityofopportunitiesgiven
a certain distance or the generalized cost the user is willing to incur to reach
these opportunities and the desirability of these opportunities.
In the context of Information Retrieval, an analogy of accessibility can be
made as follows. Instead of an actual physical space, in IR, we are predomi-
nately concerned with accessing information within a collection of documents
(i.e., informationspace),andinsteadofa transportationsystem, wehaveanIn-
formation Access System (i.e., a means by which we can access the information
in the collection, like a query mechanism, a browsing mechanism, etc). The ac-
cessibilityofadocumentisindicativeofthelikelihoodoropportunityofitbeing
retrieved by the user in this information space given such a mechanism. For ex-
ample, in a hyper-linkedcollection exposed by a browsing-basedsystem, a page
with no incoming or outgoinglinks will haveno accessibility.Conversely,a page
withthousandsofincominglinkswouldbeveryaccessible.Here,weconsiderthe
accessibilityofdocumentsgivenanIRsystem,wheredocumentsareaccessedby
queryingthesystem.Eachqueryprovidesadifferentorderinginwhichtoaccess
the documents in the information space. Much like a particular bus taking a
pre-defined route through a city. However, unlike in the physical space, in the
information space, there is no constraint imposed by the user’s current location
(i.e., at a particular document) because the IR system facilitates access to the
collectionregardlessoflocation.TheIRsystemislikebeing atabusstopwhere
every possible bus route is available, (i.e., the universe of all possible queries),
and we can select any route desired, at any time. While this makes every docu-
ment potentially accessible, the choice of route and distance the user is willing
to travel will affect just how accessible documents are in the information space.
3 Accessibility is also a key concept in other areas but defined differently. For in-
stance, the disability rights movement advocates equal access to social, political,
and economic life which includes not only physical access but access to the same
tools,services,organizationsandfacilities.AnotherexampleistheWorldWideWeb
Consortium(W3C)’sWebAccessibilityInitiative(WAI),whichisaimedtoimprove
theaccessibility oftheWorldWideWebforpeopleusingawiderangeofuseragent
devices, not just standard web browsers. However, accessibility in these contexts
concentrateson thephysicalaspects of accessing theinformation, and evenextends
to issues regarding usability and mobility.
In this paper, our main contribution is the introduction of the concept of
accessibility and the proposal of how to measure accessibility in this context.
To do so, we first describe the related research in Section 2 and draw upon
the extensive body of work in transportation planning and land use to provide
the basis in developing measures of accessibility for IR system. Then in Section
3, we propose two IR based accessibility measures that are analogous to those
in the field of transportation. The introduction of accessibility presents many
different possibilities and challenges which can not be fully addressed here, so
we summarize this initial contribution in Section 4.
2 Related Work
InHansen’sseminalpaper[10]onmeasuringaccessibilityintransportationplan-
ning and land use, he defines how accessibility could be measured:
a measurement of the spatial distribution of activities about a point ad-
justed for the ability and the desire of people or firms to overcome spatial
separation. More specifically, the formulation states that the accessibility at
point 1 to a particular typeof activity at area 2 (say employment) is directly
proportionaltothesizeoftheactivityatarea2(numberofjobs)andinversely
proportional to some function of the distance separating point 1 from area 2.
The total accessibility to employment at point 1 is the summation of the ac-
cessibility to each of the individual areas around point 1. Therefore, as more
and more jobs are located nearer to point 1, the accessibility to employment
at point 1 will increase.
Key to this definition is the notion that as opportunities become further
awaythe lessaccessiblethey become, andthat by consideringallpossibilities to
opportunities subject to the cost function based on the distance apart,provides
a measure of accessibility. Essentially, this measure quantifies the potential of
opportunities for interaction [10].InthecontextofIR,the opportunitiesarethe
documents in the information space, and we wish to capture the potential of
documents for retrieval.
2.1 Measures of Accessibility in Transportation Planning
There are numerous measures of accessibility that have been proposed in the
field of Transportation Planning; the simplest and most popular measures are
the Cumulative Opportunity Measures and Gravity Based Measures.
Cumulative Opportunity Measures also known as Isochrone measures count
the number of opportunities that can be reached within a given travel time,
distance,orgeneralizedcost[15].Anexampleapplicationofthemeasureis“the
total number of dining opportunities within 400 metres”. The advantage of this
measure is that it is intuitive and easy to compute. However, the measure is
sensitive to the size ofthe range(aroundthe point ofinterest)to be considered,
and the representation of the opportunities.
First derived by [10], Gravity Based Measures provide a general method for
measuringaccessibility,whichiswidely used.Theydifferfromcumulativebased
measures in that they include a cost function within the calculation. Generally,
thecostfunctiontakestheformofanegativeexponentialfunction(asdescribed
by [10], above), such that opportunities that are further away will have a lower
impactonthefinalaccessibilityvalue.By“further”,itismeantintermsoftime,
distance or generalized cost.
While more sophisticated measures have been developed, such as Utility
Based Measures [12]andActivity Based Measures [7],weshallonlybe consider-
ing the former two methods in this work as they are the most widely used and
acceptedmeasuresintransportationandplanning.Thus,it seems reasonableto
use these as a starting point to determine if they can be useful and informative
in IR, before developing more sophisticated measures.
2.2 Accessibility in Information Retrieval
AccessibilityissuesinIRhavefocusedonrestrictions(physicalandvirtual)toin-
dexorretrieveinformation,whetherthisisbecauseofaphysicalimpairment[8],
restrictedaccessdue to securityclearance[11],orthe inabilityto crawlportions
of the web [4]. In each case, documents are inaccessible to the user or the sys-
tem because of some physical or virtual limitation. For instance, in the latter
case, the inability to crawl a web site means that certain documents are not
indexed by the IR system, and therefore are not accessible to the user via the
IR system. Recently, it was posited that the “searchability”of a web site would
be affected by how easily pages can be crawled and how well the search engine
matches and ranks them [13]. Searchability and accessibility are therefore very
similar concepts. However, we are concerned with the influence of the IR sys-
temonaccessingdocuments.Others(e.g.[9][5])haveconsideredhowdocuments
are accessed from the index in the retrieval process to facilitate more efficient
retrieval by considering processor, disk and memory constraints. For instance
“access-ordered indices” [9] are where the documents which are more likely to
be returned at higher ranks are placed before those that are not likely to be
returned at higher ranks. Another example, is the caching of queries [3], in web
searchengines, where results pages are cached in response to popular queries in
order to facilitate efficient access.
In essence, IR is all about accessing information, and how the information
is accessed. Our work is focused on measuring the accessibility of documents
in the collection given the IR system used to access these documents. This is
different from past work, in that we are specifically examining the influence
of the IR system to restrict or promote access to the information within the
collectionasopposedtootherrestrictions.Thispaperhopestoestablishtheidea
of accessibilityas anintegralconceptin the field by highlighting its potential in
the practicaltaskofdeveloping,building,andoptimizing IRSystems,aswellas
diagnostics and evaluation.
3 Measuring Document Accessibility
GivenacollectionD,anIRsystemacceptsauserqueryqandreturnsaranking
ofdocumentsR ,whicharedeemedtoberelevanttoqfromwithinDbytheIR
q
system. We can consider the accessibility of a document as a system dependent
factor that measures how retrievable it is, with respect to the collection D and
the ranking function used by the IR system. Using the analogy of transporta-
tion, entering a query is like to choosing a particular bus, where the order of
documents returnedarelike the orderofdestinations reachedforthat givenbus
route. Opportunities to interact with resources while traveling along the route
are reflected by going through the documents returned in the ranking R . The
q
accessibility of the resources (i.e., documents) is dependant on the willingness
of the user to travel a certain distance along the route (i.e., traverse down the
rankedlist)andallthequeriesthatusersarelikelytotravelalong.So,byadapt-
ing the measures from transportation planning, we propose a general measure
of the accessibility of a document, as:
A(d)= Xo
q
·f(c
dq
,θ) (1)
q∈Q
whereo denotesthelikelihoodofexpressingqueryqfromtheuniverseofqueries
q
Q and f(c ,θ) is a generalized utility/cost function where c is the distance
dq dq
associated with accessing d through q which is defined by the rank of the doc-
ument, and θ is a parameter or set of parameters given the specific type of
measure.
A cumulative based measure can then be defined as follows: θ = c, where c
denotes the maximum rank that a user is willing to proceed down the ranked
list. The function f(c ,c) returns a value of 1 if c ≤ c (with the top-most
dq dq
position considered as rank 1), and 0 otherwise. So, if returning a document
in response to a given query has a distance greater than c associated with it,
thenitisconsideredunaccessible(forthisquery).Foranotherqueryhowever,the
documentmaybeaccessiblebecausethecostofaccessingitiswithinthedistance
c.Alternatively,thedocumentcouldbeconsideredaccessibleforthesamequery
but to a user who has a higher cost threshold. Since all the documents within
the cutoff defined by c are equally weighted, this type of measure emphasizes
the number of times the document can be retrieved within that cutoff over the
set Q.
Agravitybasedmeasurecanalsobedefinedbysettingthefunctiontoreflect
the effort of going further down the ranked list, such that the further down the
ranking the less accessible a document becomes. There are numerous ways in
which such a function could be determined. Here, we adopt the function sug-
gested in [10], where the accessibility of the document is inversely proportional
to the rank of the document, such that:
1
f(c ,β)= (2)
dq (c )β
dq
where, the set of parameters θ includes β which is a dampening factor that
adjusts how accessible the document is in the ranking. Interestingly, if the β
parameter is set to one, then accessibility of the document for the given query
is equivalent to the reciprocal rank of the document, which is related to the
(expected) search length [6]. When there is only one relevant document, the
expected search length is equivalent to the reciprocal rank of the document.
Intuitively, the expected search length (ESL) and accessibility of documents is
related,because the expected searchlength correspondsto how many irrelevant
documents have to be examined in order to find the relevant documents. The
expected search length to a particular document is proportional to the accessi-
bilityofthedocumentforagivenquery.However,whattheaccessibilitymeasure
captures is more general, i.e., how retrievable the document is given all possi-
ble/likely queries regardless of relevancy, but this link to ESL and reciprocal
rankappearsto providea connectionbetweenaccessibilityandeffectiveness.As
we have previously mentioned this direction is left for future work.
Given either measure, A(d) provides an indication of the opportunity of
retrieving d. This value can be obtained for each document d ∈ D so that we
can compare whether there is more opportunity to retrieve one document over
another. Using this measure to compare groups of documents has potential to
aid in the design, management and tuning of retrieval systems in a number of
ways. Imagine that for a given collection of documents and a given IR system,
theaverageA(d)ofasetofdocumentsisextremelyhigh,whileforanothersetof
documentstheaverageA(d)isverylow.Perhaps,the firstsetofdocumentswas
agroupofsiteentrypages,andoursystemhasa priortowardssuchpages,thus
we would expect these pages to have a higher A(d). In this case, it is desirable
that these documents are so accessible. On the other hand, if the set of highly
accessible pages was composed of spam pages, because these pages have used
“tricks”to artificially inflate the number ofqueries forwhich they areretrieved,
then this is not desirable and the system needs to be adjusted. Alternatively,
if there is a set of documents which are virtually inaccessible in the collection,
then it is a management decision to decide whether these documents should be
included in the index or not.
At a higher level, the measure A(d) motivates questions regarding how ac-
cessible documents in the collection should be, and whether we are interested
in trying to “hide” or “promote” certain documents within the collection. Or
whether we should adopt an approach that ensures access to the information is
free from bias, i.e. “universal access”4 so that any document is as accessible as
any other document in the collection. This provides a novelframeworkfor mea-
suringdocument accessibility,whichenables the considerationof suchquestions
and issues.
4 Aspreviouslymentioned,thedisabilityrightsmovementadvocatesequalaccessand
terms this notion as universal access.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of the concept of ac-
cessibility and quantifying the accessibility of documents in the collection given
a particular IR system. Measures of accessibility are not performance measures
like effectiveness or efficiency, but instead are measures of the potential of doc-
uments for retrieval (a.k.a., their retrievability [2]). This abstraction provides a
novel way to quantify and detect different levels of accessibility within the col-
lection imposed by the IR system. For a system administrator, this could prove
to be very useful in designing, managing and tuning the IR system (see [1] for
empirical examples).
Thisworkrepresentstheinitialsteptowardsformalizingaccessibilityandde-
velopingaccessibilitymeasuresfor informationspaces,in IRandmore generally
for any Information Access system. However, there are many open problems,
challengesandissueswhichhavearisenasaresultofthiswork.Furtherresearch
needs to be conducted in two main directions:
1. the calibration, computation and estimation of document accessibility mea-
sures, and
2. the application of document accessibility measures.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Stephen Robertson, Keith
van Rijsbergen and Murat Yakici for their helpful and insightful comments and
suggestions.
References
1. L.AzzopardiandV.Vinay. Documentaccessibility:Evaluatingtheaccessafforded
to a document by the retrieval system. In Workshop on Novel Methodologies for
Evaluation in Information Retrieval, pages 52–60, March 2008.
2. L.AzzopardiandV.Vinay. Retrievability:anevaluationmeasureforhigherorder
informationaccesstasks. InProceedings ofthe 17th ACM Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’08, page 561–570, 2008.
3. R. Baeza-Yates, A. Gionis, F. Junqueira, V. Murdock, V. Plachouras, and F. Sil-
vestri. The impact of caching on search engines. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
SIGIR conference, pages 183–190, 2007.
4. P. Bailey, N. Craswell, and D. Hawking. Chart of darkness: Mapping a large
intranet. Technical report, CSIRO Mathematical and Information Sciences, 2000.
5. S. Buttcher and C. L. A. Clarke. A document-centric approach to static index
pruning in text retrieval systems. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, 2006.
6. W. S. Cooper. Expected search length: A single measure of retrieval effectiveness
basedonweakorderingactionofretrievalsystems.JournaloftheAmericanSociety
for Information Science, 19(1):30–41, 1968.
7. X. Dong, M. E. Ben-Akiva, J. L. Bowman, and J. L. Walker. Moving from trip-
basedtoactivity-basedmeasuresofaccessibility. Transportation research. Part A,
Policy and practice, 40(2):163–180, 2006.
8. I.Fajardo, J. J.Canas, L.Salmeron,andJ.Abascal. Improvingdeafusers’acces-
sibilityinhypertextinformationretrieval:aregraphicalinterfacesusefulforthem?
Behaviour and Information Technology, 25(6):455–467(13), 2006.
9. S. Garcia, H. E. Williams, and A. Cannane. Access-ordered indexes. In Twenty-
SevethAustralasianComputerScienceConference(ACSC2004),pages7–14,2004.
10. W. Hansen. How accessibility shape land use. Journal of the American Institute
of Planners, 25(2):73–76, 1959.
11. D.Hawking. Challenges in enterprisesearch. InADC ’04: Proceedings of the 15th
Australasian database conference, pages15–24, Darlinghurst,Australia, Australia,
2004. Australian Computer Society, Inc.
12. H. Neuburger. User benefit in the evaluation of transport and land use plans.
Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 5:52–75, 1971.
13. T. Upstill, N. Craswell, and D. Hawking. Buying bestsellers online: A case study
in search & searchability. In 7th Australasian Document Computing Symposium,
Sydney,Australia, 2002.
14. C.J.vanRijsbergen. InformationRetrieval. Butterworths,London,secondedition
edition, 1979.
15. M. Wachs and T. G. Kumagai. Physiscal accessibility as a social indicator. So-
cioeconomic Planning Science, 7:327–456, 1973.
16. I. H. Witten, A. Moffat, and B. T. C. Managing Gigabytes: Compressing and
Indexing Documents and Images. Morgan Kaufmann Publishing, San Franciso,
second edition edition, 1999.
