AN AUTOMATED MULTIPLE-CHOICE
QUESTION GENERATION USING
NATURAL
LANGUAGE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES
Chidinma A. Nwafor1 and Ikechukwu E. Onyenwe2
1Department of Computer Science, Nnamdi Azikiwe University Awka, Anambra State,
Nigeria
1
nwaforchidinmaa@gmail.com and
2
ie.onyenwe@unizik.edu.ng
ABSTRACT
Automatic multiple-choice question generation (MCQG) is a useful yet challenging task in Natural
Language Processing (NLP). It is the task of automatic generation of correct and relevant questions from
textual data. Despite its usefulness, manually creating sizeable, meaningful and relevant questions is a
time-consuming and challenging task for teachers. In this paper, we present an NLP-based system for
automatic MCQG for Computer-Based Testing Examination (CBTE).We used NLP technique to extract
keywords that are important words in a given lesson material. To validate that the system is not perverse,
five lesson materials were used to check the effectiveness and efficiency of the system. The manually
extracted keywords by the teacher were compared to the auto-generated keywords and the result shows
that the system was capable of extracting keywords from lesson materials in setting examinable
questions. This outcome is presented in a user-friendly interface for easy accessibility.
KEYWORDS
Natural Language Processing,NLP, Computer-Based Test Examination, CBTE, Automatic Question
Generation, AOG, Document, Tokenization, Multiple-Choice Question, MCQ
1. INTRODUCTION
According to [1], automatic question generation (AQG) is the task of automatically generating
syntactically sound, semantically correct and relevant questions from various input formats such
as text, a structured database or a knowledge base. AQG can be naturally applied in many
domains such as Massive Open Online Course (MOOC), setting objective/subjective questions,
automated help systems, search engines, Chabot systems (e.g. for customer interaction), and
healthcare for analyzing mental health [2]. Despite its usefulness, manually creating meaningful
and relevant questions is a time-consuming and challenging task. For example, while evaluating
students on reading comprehension, it is tedious for a teacher to manually create questions, find
answers to those questions, and thereafter evaluates answers.
In the field of education, questioning is widely acknowledged as an effective instructional
strategy to evaluation or assessment of students or the learner at the end of a lesson. Questioning
as an instructional tool can be traced back to the fourth century, when Socrates used questions
and answers to challenge assumptions, expose contradictions, and lead to new knowledge and
wisdom. Since Socrates, questioning was employed to encourage students to use higher-order
thinking processes and it is the dominant mode of teacher-student interaction accounted for
almost 80% of the total interactions [3]. There are three major types of assessment for
evaluating students’ learning capabilities – Formative assessment, Interim assessment and
Summative assessment. Generating questions that covers most areas of a lesson note would help
in Formative and Interim assessment because the Formative assessment helps to improve
students’ understanding and performance while the Interim assessment helps teachers identify
gaps in student understanding and instruction. Multiple-choice Question (MCQ)s that widely
cover all the areas of a lesson note is an important effort to test students on the above
assessments and the students’ overall cognitive levels held at the end of a lesson. Today, MCQs
in the area of Computer-Based Testing Examination (CBTE) is the most commonly used tool
for assessing the knowledge capabilities of learners in the field of learning.
Properly constructed MCQs can assess higher cognitive processing of Bloom’s taxonomy such
as interpretation, synthesis and application of knowledge, instead of just testing recall of
isolated facts. Most institutions and Centre of learning have embraced MCQ testing as the
foundation of their testing systems, thereby saving cost especially where large numbers of
candidates are involved—and it is a format that can provide precision where other measurement
options may be lacking such as observing performance.
Effective style of questioning as described by [4] is always an issue to help students attend to
the desired learning outcome. Furthermore, to make it effective, balancing between lower and
higher level question is a must [4]. Time-consuming factor in setting MCQs hinders achieving
the above assessments and good learning outcomes due to MCQs generated tend to cover
limited areas of a lesson note from which the MCQs are taken from. Therefore, it is necessary
for an automatic system that will bootstrap the existing method of setting MCQs.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a branch of artificial intelligence that deals with the
interaction between computers and humans using the natural language. The ultimate objective
of NLP is to read, decipher, understand, and make sense of the written or textual data in natural
languages of human in a manner that is valuable. In this paper, we focus on the setting of MCQs
for CBTE through NLP to improve the method of setting MCQs and modification, and for
creating a viable question bank for subsequent use by the academicians for their learners. This
will ensure an MCQ that includes appropriate questions and options based on the learning
objectives and importance of the topics discussed in a lesson material. We used NLP methods,
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and N-grams, to extract the most
significant words present in a lesson material and the selection does not depend on any
vocabulary; these words are keywords that capture the main topics discussed in a lesson
material, they also serve as an indication of document relevance for users in an information
retrieval (IR) environment.
2. RELATED LITERATURE
[5] developed ArikIturri, an AQG for Basque language test questions. The information source
for this question generator consists of linguistically analysed real corpora, represented in XML
mark-up language. [6] researched on using NLP on narrative texts to find discourse connectives
for AQG. Discourse connectives are words or phrases that indicate relationships between two
logical sentences or phrases and suggest the presence of mutually related extended verbal
expression. The questions were generated by first extracting the text from the materials supplied
by the user using text processing concept of NLP. [7] developed a system which can generate
various logical questions from the given text input. The system uses 3-step strategy, viz; Select
the best potential set of sentences from the given text input from which we could generate the
questions, find the subject and context of the sentence to find its core agenda (Gap Selection)
and analyze the best form of question that can be generated from that sentence (Question
Formation). [8] proposed a method for automatically generating distractors for multiple-choice
English vocabulary questions. The proposed method introduces new sources for collecting
distractor candidates and utilises semantic similarity and collocation information when ranking
the collected candidates. [9] looked at the development of an automatic factual open cloze
question generation system which can generate fill-in-the-blank questions without alternatives.
The system first extracts a set of informative sentences from the given input corpus based on
Part-of-Speech tagging based rules.
Then, generate questions by omitting the answer-keys which are selected by identifying domain
specific words in the sentences. The system also suggests answer hints for the examinees to
reduce the number of possible answers that make assessment easier.
3. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
The paper is based on the generation of MCQG through Natural Language Processing
Techniques.
This is used to process the lesson materials/documents fed by the teacher into a multi-choice
questions alongside the answers to each questions. The NLP processes are applied using TF-
IDF and N-gram. This system only applies to the text of the document or lesson material in
extracting keywords presented by the teacher. The document is converted into text file, loaded
into the system memory and stored on the system. The text is split into sentences. The split
sentences are tokenized, from which the corpus are built as TF-IDF and N-gram mode. From
Figure 1, the raw data is the original text file from the document (lesson material). Noise
removal is any piece of text which is not relevant to the context of the data such as stop words.
Word Normalization converts high dimensional features or N different features to the low
dimensional space or 1 feature, it includes tokenization and stemming. The cleaned text is the
end result ready for further experimentation and such is used to analyse and auto-generate multi-
choice questions (MCQs). Furthermore, we develop an application interface for easy access and
presentation of the MCQs to the teachers for acceptance or rejection.
Figure 1. Text Preprocessing of Input Data.
3.1. Dataset and Preparation
In other to compute the performance evaluation of this paper to help check that it is not
perverse, keywords extracted by the NLP techniques for accuracy computation was validated.
First, five different lecture materials of varying sizes of sentences was selected (see Table 1).
Table1. Statistics of the Textual Data Used
Lesson Materials Number of Number of Number of Keywords by Teachers
Sentences Words
Computer Science 39 956 206
Geology 33 903 86
Philosophy 46 820 100
Religion 61 1474 187
History 64 1472 210
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the keywords extraction methods on these lesson materials,
it was necessary to collect manually marked keywords to create a gold standard for the
evaluation. The usual procedure of creating a gold standard of keywords is having one
professional indexer who extracts the keywords based on his expertise and training, but also
based on a set of guidelines defined by the interested parties. However, for this experiment, it
was felt that the teachers (T) are appropriate for setting a gold standard. They know what words
are most relevant in their lecture materials. Each lecture materials were annotated by a T to set a
gold standard to which each set of auto-generated keywords could be compared. The statistics
of the data used are stated in Table 1.
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of word counts.
Lesson Materials Minimum Number Maximum Mean number of
of Sentences Number of Words Sentence
Computer Science 6.0 59.0 24.5
Geology 10.0 43.0 25.8
Philosophy 1.0 39.0 17.8
Religion 1.0 59.0 24.2
History 1.0 79.0 23.0
Table 2 explains the columns “number of Sentences” and “number of words” in Table 1. For
instance
Computer Science in Table 3.2, the least sentence has 6-word length of size while maximum
sentence has 59-word length of size. Summation of all the sizes of the sentences divided by the
total number of sentences gives the mean size of sentences in Computer Science. This helps
gain insight on how words are formed in the sentences of a lecture material. For example,
sentences of “Minumum number of Sentence” < 5 are removed on the preprocessing stage.
3.2. Experimental Tools
The following NLP techniques are used for automated generation, manipulation and analysis of
data from Figure 1. Data here is the lesson materials from teachers henceforth referred to as
documents. In this paper, we represent each sentence in a lesson material as a document. For
the auto-generated MCQ’s application interface, we used Django. It is a high-level
Python Web framework that encourages rapid development and clean, pragmatic
design. It also takes care of much of the hassle of Web development and focuses on
writing the API without needing to reinvent the wheel
3.2.1. Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) is used for stop-words filtering in
various subject fields including text summarization and classification. The weight is composed
of two terms: Term frequency (TF) and Inverse Document Frequency (IDF).
 TF: Term Frequency measures how frequently a term occurs in a document. It is
possible that a term would appear much more times in long documents than shorter ones
because every document is different in length. Thus, it is stated below as a way of
normalization:
Number of times term t appears in a document
TF =
t
Total number of terms in the document
 IDF: Inverse Document Frequency measures how important a term is. While computing
TF, all terms are considered equally important. However, it is known that certain terms like ‘is’,
‘of’, and ‘that’, may appear a lot of times but have little importance. Thus, it is computed as
follows:
Total number of documents
IDF = Log ( )
t e Number of documents with term t in it
 The TF-IDFt;d weighting scheme assigns to term t a weight in document d given by
TF-IDF = TF x IDF
t,d t,d t
3.2.2. N-gram
This is a contiguous sequence of n items from a given sequence of text or speech. The items can
be phonemes, syllables, letters, words or base pairs according to the application. The n-grams
typically are collected from a text or speech corpus. An n-gram of size 1 is referred to as a
‘unigram’; size 2 is a ‘bigram’; size 3 is a ‘trigram’. Larger sizes are sometimes referred to, by
the value of n, for example, ‘4-gram’, ‘5-gram’, and so on.
4. RESULT DISCUSSION
This discusses the performance of the NLP techniques for MCQs generation applied to the
dataset of different lecture materials contents (see Table 1) and compared with the gold standard
created by T. Table 3 shows the result of application of the above techniques on documents
stated in Table 1 after going through preprocessing in Figure 1. Furthermore, MCQs generation
performance scores on the dataset were computed using precision and recall. Precision was to
validate the quality of the keywords by MCQs generation extracted from the lecture materials
and recall was used to measure the quantity.
Precision answers the question – The keywords extracted from the lecture materials are they
important words according to the gold standard marked by the teachers? While recall answers
the question - are all the important words in the lecture materials extracted?
Table 3. Statistics of the Keywords automatically extracted from documents.
Lesson Materials Number of Keywords Auto Extracted
Computer Science 368
Geology 318
Philosophy 254
Religion 488
History 471
For the performance evaluation, the following metrics precision, recall and f-measure
are used in this research.
Precision= numberCorrect (1)
numberExtracted
Recall= numberCorrect (2)
totalExtracted
where numberCorrect is equal to true positive (TP), that is, important keywords
extracted. numberExtracted in eqn 1 is summation of TP and false positive (FP). False
Positive is extracted keywords that are not important words according to the gold
standard. totalExtracted in eqn 2 is the summation of TP and false negative (FN). FN
are keywords not extracted but are important words. To find the harmonic mean
(average) of the precision and recall for computation of balance between precision (p)
and recall (r) in the system:
F−measure=2∗(
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙∗𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
) (3)
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙+𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛
For each lecture material, for instance Computer Science (CS), there are two sets of
data:
 Gold standard keywords that are important words in A prepared by the teacher.
Henceforth known as truthset.
 The keywords extracted automatically from A. Henceforth known as extractedset.
From the above explanation, assuming truthset and extractedset are sets from CS. TP is a set of
intersection between truthset and extractedset (TP = truthset & extractedset), FP is a set of
keywords that are in extractedset but not in truthset (fp = extractedset – truthset), while FN is a
set of keywords that are in truthset but not in extractedset (fn = truthset – extractedset). Using
Table 1, there are 206 truthset and 368 extractedset for CS lesson material.
Table 4. Precision, Recall and F-measure.
Lesson Materials TP FP FN Precision Recall F-measure
Computer Science 162 206 31 0.44 0.84 0.58
Geology 79 293 3 0.25 0.96 0.39
Philosophy 94 160 2 0.37 0.98 0.54
Religion 169 319 1 0.35 0.94 0.51
History 185 286 18 0.39 0.91 0.55
120
100
S 80
C
O Precision
60
R
Recall
E
40 f-measure
S
20
0
Computer Geology Philosophy Religion History
Science
Figure 2. Bar charts of Precision, Recall and F-measure of scores on Table 4.
From Table 4 and Figure 2, it can be observed from the Recall scores that the majority of the
keywords automatically extracted are important words. Although Precision scores show that
there are other keywords automatically extracted that are not important according to the gold
standard set. At the moment we want to ensure that the majority (if not all) the keywords
extracted from lesson notes are in the gold standard sets. The keywords extracted by the NLP
processes are used to generate Multi-Choice Questions (MCQs).
Since teachers are not technical persons, we develop a user-friendly interface where the MCQs
generated are presented for teachers to easily access them. MCQs are generated from the
extracted keywords by locating each keyword position given a document.
Table 5. Sample TF-IDF weightd sentences.
Sentence TF-IDFWeights
The Difference Engine consisted {’entirely’: 0.305, ’consisted’: 0.305, ’components’:
entirely of mechanical components. 0.305, ’mechanical’: 0.209, ’difference’: 0.209}
Figure 3. Figure showing API for lecture material upload
.
Figure 4. Figure showing API for generated MCQs.
Each keyword of a document has a TF-IDF weight resulting in a composite-weighted sentence,
this is illustrated in Table 5. How the weight in Table 5 work is when it is highest it means that t
occurs many times within a small number of documents (thus lending high discriminating
power to those documents); lower when the t occurs fewer times in a document, or occurs in
many documents (thus offering a less pronounced relevance signal); lowest when the t occurs in
virtually all documents. Given this definition, in a document we extract keywords with top
weights as shown in Table 5. These extracted keywords are mapped to their positions within the
document so that they are replaced with ‘–’ symbols instead. Then, we blindly and randomly
select three other keywords from the pool of extracted keywords plus the main keyword that
was replaced with ‘–’ to serve as options from which users are to select the right one. For a
document, the number of multi-choice questions (MCQs) to be generated is dependent on the
number of keywords extracted (see Table 5). These MCQs are regarded as suggested questions
for the teachers to accept or reject. Figure 3 shows the API for lecture material upload while
figure 4 show the API for the generated MCQs. The accept button is clicked by the teacher to
select an MCQ if satisfied with it.
5. CONCLUSION
Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) generation for CBTE using Natural Language Processing
(NLP) techniques is a system that helps teachers set multi-choice questions from their
documents in a text file and thereafter provide answers to the questions generated.
Consequently, it can be used in every area of education sector to test the knowledge or level of
the students. However, this paper is not concerned with the issue of whether multiple-choice
tests are better assessment methodology than other types of tests. What it focuses on is on
application of NLP techniques to generate MCQs about facts explicitly based on keywords as
stated in a text format of a given lesson material. From the results, it has shown that the system
was capable of extracting keywords from lesson materials in setting examinable questions. This
outcome is presented in a user-friendly interface for teachers easy accessibility using Django, a
web framework for Python.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank all the teachers and students that contributed to the success of this work. Your
feedbacks are very insightful and helpful towards the development of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Mannem Prashanth, Rashmi Prasad, and Aravind Joshi. (2010). Question generation from
paragraphs at UPenn: QGSTEC system description. In Proceedings of QG2010: The Third
Workshop on Question Generation, pages 84–91.
[2] Colleen E Crangle and Joyce Brothers Kart. (2015). A questions-based investigation of
consumer mental Health information. PeerJ, 3:e867.
[3] Gall MD. (1970). The use of questions in teaching. Review of Educational Research, 40: 707
720.
[4] Swart (2010). Evaluation of Final Examination Papers in Engineering: A Case Study Using
Bloom’s Taxonomy. IEEE Transactions on Education, (May 2010) Vol. 53, No.2 257-264.
[5] Aldabe, I., De Lacalle, M. L., Maritxalar, M., Martinez, E., and Uria, L. (2006). Arikiturri: an
Automatic question generator based on corpora and nlp techniques. In International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 584-594). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
[6] Folajimi, Y. O., and Omojola, O. E. (2013). Natural language processing techniques for
automatic test Questions generation using discourse connectives. Journal of Computer Science
and Its Application, 20(2), 6076.
[7] Aditya S. (2018). Using Natural Language Processing for Smart Question Generation. An Intel
Developer Program Documentation. https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/using- natural
language processing forsmart-question-generation.
[8] Susanti, Y., Tokunaga, T., Nishikawa, H., and Obari, H. 2018. Automatic distractor generation
for multiple Choice English vocabulary questions. Research and Practice in Technology
Enhanced Learning, 13(1), 15.
[9] Das, B., and Majumder, M. (2017). Factual open cloze question generation for assessment of
learne’s knowledge. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
14(1), 24.
