9102
luJ
03
]LP.sc[
2v66970.6081:viXra
An Application of Computable Distributions to the
Semantics of Probabilistic Programs
Daniel Huang
University of California, Berkeley
Greg Morrisett
Cornell University
Bas Spitters
Aarhus University
Abstract: In this chapter, we explore how (Type-2) computable distri-
butions can be used to give both (algorithmic) sampling and distributional
semantics to probabilistic programs with continuous distributions. Towards
thisend,wesketch an encodingof computabledistributionsina fragmentof
Haskell and show how topological domains can be used to model the result-
ing PCF-like language. We also examine the implications that a (Type-2)
computable semantics has for implementing conditioning. We hope to draw
out the connection between an approach based on (Type-2) computability
and ordinary programming throughout the chapter as well as highlight the
relation with constructive mathematics (via realizability).
Keywords: computable distributions, semantics, probabilistic programs,
topological domains, realizability
1 Overview
Probabilistic programs exhibit a tension between the continuous and the
discrete. On one hand, we are interested in using probabilistic programs to
model natural phenomena—phenomena that are often modeled well with
reals and continuous distributions (e.g., as in physics and biology). On the
other hand, we are also boundby the fundamentally discrete nature of com-
putation, which limits how we can (1) represent models as programs and
then (2) compute the results of queries on the model. The aim of this chap-
1
2 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
ter123 is to keep this tension in the fore by using the notion of a (Type-2)
computable distribution as a lens through which to understand probabilistic
programs. We organize our exploration via a series of questions.
(i) What is a (Type-2) computable distribution (Section 2)? First, we review
Type-2 computability (e.g., see Weihrauch, 2000) and how it applies to
reals and continuous distributions. The high-level idea is to represent
continuum-sized objects as a sequence of discrete approximations that
converge to the appropriate object instead of abstracting the representa-
tion of such an object.
(ii) How do we implement continuous distributions as a library in a general-
purpose programming language (Section 3)? After we have seen the basic
idea behind Type-2 computability, we sketch an implementation of reals
and continuous distributions in a fragment of Haskell. We emphasize that
the implementation does not assume any reals, continuous distributions,
or operations on them as black-box primitives.
(iii) What mathematical structures can we use to model such a library (Sec-
tion 4)? Our next step is to find mathematical structures that can be
used to faithfully model the implementation. Towards this end, we review
topological domains (e.g., see Battenfeld et al., 2007; Battenfeld, 2008),
which are an alternative to traditional structures used in denotational se-
mantics. Topological domains support all the standard domain-theoretic
constructions needed to model PCF-like4 languages as well as capture the
notion of (Type-2) computability. In particular, we can encode reals and
continuous distributions as topological domains so that they are suitable
for our purposes of giving semantics.
(iv) What does a semantics for a core language look like (Section 5)? In this
section, we make the connection between the implementation and the
mathematics more concrete by using the constructs described previously
to give both(algorithmic) samplinganddistributionalsemantics to acore
PCF-like language extended with reals and continuous distributions (via
a probability monad) called λ .5 The sampling semantics can be used
CD
1 Thischaptercontains materialfromHuang(2017)andHuangandMorrisett(2016).
2 DanielHuangwassupportedbyDARPAFA8750-17-2-0091.
3 BasSpitterswaspartiallysupportedbytheGuardedhomotopytypetheoryproject,fundedby
theVillumFoundation,projectnumber12386andpartiallybytheAFOSRproject‘Homotopy
TypeTheoryandProbabilisticComputation’,12595060.Anyopinions,findingsandconclusions
orrecommendationsexpressedinthismaterialarethoseoftheauthorsanddonotnecessarily
reflecttheviewsoftheAFOSR.
4 Recall that the PCF (Programming Computable Functions) language is a core calculus that
canbeusedtomodeltypedfunctionallanguages suchasHaskell.
5 λCD also supports distributions on any countably based space. This means that λCD does
not (in general) have distributions on function spaces, although the language itself contains
higher-orderfunctions.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 3
to guide implementation while the distributional semantics can be used
for equational reasoning.
(v) What are the implications of taking a (Type-2) computable viewpoint for
Bayesian inference (Section 6)? Perhaps surprisingly, at least to those
who employ Bayesian inference in practice, it can be shown that condi-
tioning is not (Type-2) computable (see Ackerman et al., 2011). Hence,
there is a sense in which a “Turing-complete” probabilistic programming
language cannot support conditional queries for every expressible proba-
bilisticmodel.Fortunately,wedonotrunintothesepathologiesinpractice
and can recover conditioning in sufficiently general settings.
Wehopetodrawouttheconnectionbetweenanapproachbasedon(Type-2)
computability with ordinary programming(i.e., programmingin a fragment
of Haskell) throughout the chapter as well as highlight the relation with
constructive mathematics via realizability (e.g., see Streicher, 2008) (Sec-
tion 4.4).
Prerequisites We assume basic knowledge of programming language se-
mantics (e.g., at the level of Gunter, 1992). For our purposes,this primarily
includes (1) the application of category theory to programming language
semantics and (2) the use of complete partial orders (CPOs) to model the
semantics of PCF. As wewill begiving examples in Haskell, familiarity with
theHaskellprogramminglanguagewillalsobeassumed.6 Finally,weassume
basic knowledge of measure-theoretic probability (e.g., see Durrett, 2010).
2 Computability Revisited
What is a computable distribution? Oneapproachtostudyingcomputability
is based on Turing machines (e.g., see Sipser, 2012). Under this approach,
we define (1) a machine model (i.e., the Turing machine) and (2) conditions
underwhichthemachinemodelissaidtocompute.Moreconcretely,aTuring
machine is said to compute a (partial) function f : Σ∗ ⇀ Σ∗ if it halts with
f(w) ∈ Σ∗ on the output tape given w ∈ Σ∗ on an input tape, where Σ is
a finite set and Σ∗ , {a ...a | a ∈ Σ,0 ≤ i ≤ n} is a collection of words
0 n i
comprised of characters from Σ. The two element set 2, {0,1} for bits (or
booleans) is a commonly used alphabet.
This definition of computability reveals that traditional computation is
6 FamiliaritywithothertypedfunctionallanguagessuchasMLshouldalsosuffice,althoughwe
shouldremindourselvesthatHaskellhascall-by-needsemanticssothatithasalazyorder-of-
evaluation.
4 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
fundamentally discrete. We can see this directly in the definition of a com-
putable function (with type Σ∗ ⇀ Σ∗), which maps elements of a discrete
domain (i.e., a set of finite words Σ∗) to elements of a discrete codomain
(i.e., a set of finite words Σ∗ again). As Σ∗ is countable, it cannot be put in
bijection with the reals R; hence, we cannot encode all the reals on a Turing
machine.
One immediate issue that this highlights for probabilistic programs is
how one should handle reals and continuous distributions while maintain-
ing the connection back to computation. A pragmatic solution to this is
to use floating point arithmetic, i.e., discretize and finitize the reals. From
this perspective, we can model the semantics of probabilistic programs us-
ing floating point numbers and finitely-supported discrete distributions (on
floats) so that the semantics more faithfully models an actual implementa-
tion.Nevertheless,wesacrificethecorrespondencebetween theprogramand
themathematics thatweuseonpencil-paper.Analternativetothesituation
above is to generalize the notion of computability to continuum-sized sets in
such a way that the computations can still by implemented by a standard
machine.
2.1 Type-2 Computability
Type-Two Theory of Effectivity (abbreviated TTE, see Weihrauch, 2000)
changes the conditions under which a machine is said to compute an answer
but keeps the machine model as is. In this setting, a machine is said to
compute a function f : Σω ⇀ Σω if it can write any initial segment of
f(w) ∈ Σω on the output tape in finite time given w ∈ Σ∗ on an input
tape, where Σω , {a a ... | a ∈ Σ,i ∈ N} is the set of streams composed
0 1 i
of symbols from the finite set Σ. The set Σω has continuum cardinality,
and hence, can represent the reals and a class of distributions (Section 2.2).
Oncewerepresent continuum-sizedobjectsonamachine,wehaveanavenue
for studying which functions are Type-2 computable. Throughout the rest
of the chapter, we will abbreviate Type-2 computable as computable7 and
use Type-2 computable for emphasis. We now review computable reals and
distributions.
2.2 Computability, Reals and Distributions
Computabilityandreals Intuitively,wecanrepresentarealonamachine
by encoding its binary expansion. More formally, we represent a real x ∈ R
7 ComputabilityintheordinarysensereferstoType-1computability.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 5
onamachinebyencodingafastCauchysequenceofrationals thatconverges
tox.Recallthatasequence(q ) whereeachq ∈ QisCauchy ifforevery
n n∈N n
ǫ > 0, there is an N such that |q −q | < ǫ for every n,m > N. Thus, the
n m
elements of a Cauchy sequence become closer and closer to one another as
we traverse the sequence. When |q −q | <2−n for all n, we call (q )
n n+1 n n∈N
a fast Cauchy sequence. Hence, the representation of a real as a fast Cauchy
sequence evokes the idea of enumerating its binary expansion. A real x ∈ R
iscomputable ifwecanenumerate(uniformlyinanenumerationofrationals)
a fast Cauchy sequence that converges to x.
We give some examples of reals encoded as fast Cauchy sequences now.
Example 2.1 (Rational). Consider two encodings of 0 as a fast Cauchy
sequence below.
(Constant) Let (x ) where x , 0 for n∈ N.
n n∈N n
(Thrashing) Let (y ) where y , 1 for n ∈ N.
n n∈N n (−2)n+1
As0itselfisalsoarationalnumber,wecansimplyrepresentitasaconstant0
sequencegiven by (x ) .We can also represent0 as thesequence(y ) ,
n n∈N n n∈N
where the sequence jumps back and forth between positive and negative
fractional powers of two as it converges towards 0. 0 is clearly a computable
real.
Example 2.2 (Irrational). Let x , 2+ 2+n 1. Then (x ) is a fast
n k=2 k! n n∈N
Cauchy encoding of e. It is easy to see that e is a computable real.
P
Example 2.3 (Non-computable). Every real can be expressed as a fast
Cauchy sequence so there are necessarily non-computable reals as well. Let
(M ) be some enumeration of Turing machines. Let t , 1 and
n n∈N 0
2·t M halts
t , n n
n+1
(1+t
n
M
n
does not halt.
Then (x ) where x , n 1 is a fast Cauchy sequence that is not
n n∈N n i=0 2ti
computable because the Halting problem is not decidable.
P
Afunctionf : R → Riscomputable if given a(fastCauchy)sequencecon-
vergingtox ∈ R,thereisanalgorithmthatoutputsa(fastCauchy)sequence
convergingtof(x).8 Weemphasizethatthealgorithmmustworkgenerically
foranyinput(fastCauchy)sequenceincludingthenon-computableones.we
give some examples now.
8 A function f : Rn → R is computable if given (fast Cauchy) sequences converging to
x1,...,xn ∈ R, there is an algorithm that outputs a (fast Cauchy) sequence converging to
f(x1,...,xn).
6 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Example 2.4 (Addition). The function + : R → R that adds 0 is com-
0
putable because an algorithm can obtain a (fast Cauchy) output sequence
by adding the (fast Cauchy) inputsequence element-wise to a (fast Cauchy)
sequence of 0.
Most familiar functions are computable (e.g., subtraction, multiplication,
inverses, exponentiation, logarithms on non-negative reals, and trigonomet-
ric functions such as sines and cosines) so that there is an algorithm that
transforms (fast Cauchy) inputs into (fast Cauchy) outputs. Nevertheless,
there are familiar functions that are not computable.
Example 2.5 (Non-computable). Consider the function = : R → 2 that
0
tests if the input is equal to 0 or not. Intuitively, this function is not com-
putable because we need to check the entire input sequence. For example,
to check that the constant sequence is equivalent to the thrashing sequence,
we have to check the entirety of both sequences, which cannot be done in
finite time.
Computable metric spaces Topological spaces enable us to build a more
general notion of computability on a space.9 For the purposes of introduc-
ing reals and distributions, we consider topological spaces with a notion of
distance, i.e., metric spaces. As a reminder, a metric space (X,d) is a set
X equipped with a metric d :X ×X → R. A metric induces a collection of
sets called (open) balls, where a ball centered at c ∈ X with radius r ∈ R
is the set of points within r of c, i.e., B(c,r) , {x ∈ X | d(c,x) < r}. The
topology O(X) associated with a metric space X is the one induced by the
collection of balls. Hence, the open balls of a metric space provide a notion
of distance in addition to providing a notion of approximation.
Example 2.6. (N,d ) endows the naturals N with the discrete topol-
Discrete
ogy (i.e.,O(N) = 2N), whered is thediscrete metric (i.e.,d(n,m) , 0
Discrete
if n = m and d(n,m) , 1 otherwise for n,m ∈ N).
Example 2.7. (R,d ) endows the reals R with the familiar Euclidean
Euclid
topology, whered is thestandard Euclidean metric (i.e.,d (x,y) ,
Euclid Euclid
|x−y|).
Example 2.8. (2ω,d ) endows the set of bit-streams 2ω with the Can-
Cantor
tor topology, where d is defined as
Cantor
1
d (x,y) , inf{ |x 6= y }.
Cantor 2n n n
9 Formorebackground ontopology, wereferthereadertoMunkres(2000).
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 7
One can check that a basic open set of the Cantor topology is of the form
a ...a 2ω , {b b ··· ∈ 2ω | b = a ,1 ≤ i ≤ n}. That is, basic open sets of
1 n 1 2 i i
Cantor space fix finite-prefixes.
A computable metric space imposes additional conditions on a metric
space so that a machine can enumerate successively more accurate approx-
imations (according to the metric) of a point in the metric space. We need
two additional definitions before we can state the definition. First, we say S
is dense in X if for every x ∈ X, there is a sequence (s ) that converges
n n∈N
to x, where s ∈ S for every n. Second, we say that (X,d) is complete if
n
every Cauchy sequence comprised of elements from X also converges to a
point in X.
Definition 2.9. A computable metric space is a tuple (X,d,S) such that
(1) (X,d) is a complete metric space, (2) S is a countable, enumerable, and
dense subset, and (3) the real d(s ,s ) is computable for s ,s ∈ S (see
i j i j
Hoyrup and Rojas, 2009, Def. 2.4.1).
Example 2.10. (R,d ,Q) is a computable metric space for the reals
Euclid
where we use the rationals Q as the approximating elements. Note that we
can equivalently use dyadic rationals as the approximating elements instead
of Q.
Computability and distributions A distribution over the computable
metricspace(X,d,S)canbeformulatedasapointofthecomputablemetric
space
(M(X),d ,D(S)),
ρ
whereM(X)isthesetofBorelprobabilitymeasuresonacomputablemetric
space (X,d,S), d is the Prokhorov metric (see Hoyrup and Rojas, 2009,
ρ
Defn.4.1.1),andD(S)istheclassofdistributionswithfinitesupportatideal
pointsS andrationalmasses(seeHoyrup and Rojas,2009,Prop.4.1.1).The
Prokhorov metric is defined as
d (µ,ν) , inf{ǫ > 0 |µ(A) ≤ ν(Aǫ)+ǫ for every Borel A} ,
ρ
where Aǫ , {x ∈ X | d(x,y) < ǫ for some y ∈ A}. One can check that
the sequence below converges (with respect to the Prokhorov metric) to the
(standard) uniform distribution U(0,1).
1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1
07→ , 7→ , 0 7→ , 7→ , 7→ , 7→ ,...,
2 2 2 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
(cid:26) (cid:27) (cid:26) (cid:27)
8 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Thus,auniformdistributioncanbeseenasthelimitofasequenceofincreas-
inglyfinerdiscrete,uniformdistributions.Aswithacomputablereal,wesay
that adistribution µ ∈ M(X) is computable if we can enumerate (uniformly
in an enumeration of a basis and rationals) a fast Cauchy sequence that
converges to µ.
Although the idea of constructing a (computable) distribution as a (com-
putable) point is fairly intuitive for the standard uniform distribution, it
may be more difficult to perform the construction for more complicated dis-
tributions. Fortunately, we can also think of a distribution on a computable
metric space (X,d,S) in terms of sampling, i.e., as a Type-2 computable
function 2ω ⇀ X. To make this more concrete, we sketch an algorithm that
samples from the standard uniform distribution given a stream of fair coin
flips. The idea is to generate a value that can be queried for more precision
instead of a sample x in its entirety.
Let µ (a ...a 2ω) , 1/2n be the distribution associated with a stream
iid 1 n
of fair coin flips where 0 corresponds to heads and 1 corresponds to tails. A
samplingalgorithm will interleave flippingcoins with outputting an element
tothedesiredprecision,suchthatthesequenceofoutputs(s ) converges
n n∈N
toasample.Forinstance,onebinarydigitofprecisionforastandarduniform
distribution corresponds to obtaining the point 1/2 because it is within
1/2 of any point in the unit interval. Demanding another digit of precision
produces either 1/4 or 3/4 according to the result of a fair coin flip. This
is encoded below using the function bisect10, which recursively bisects an
intervalntimes,startingwith(0,1), usingtherandombit-stream utoselect
which interval to recurse on.
uniform:(Nat → Bool) → (Nat → Rat)
uniform, λu.λn.bisectu0 1 n
In the limit, we obtain a single point corresponding to the sample.
Thesamplingviewis(computably)equivalenttotheviewofacomputable
distribution as a point in an appropriate computable metric space. To state
the equivalence, we need a few definitions. A computable probability space
(X,µ)is apairwhereX is acomputablemetric spaceandµis acomputable
distribution(see Hoyrup and Rojas, 2009,Def. 5.0.1). We call a distribution
µ on X samplable if there is a computable function s : (2ω,µ ) ⇀ (X,µ)
iid
such that s is computable on dom(s) of full-measure (i.e., µ(X) = 1) and is
measure-preserving (i.e., µ = µ ◦s−1).
iid
Proposition 2.11. (Computable iff samplable, see Freer and Roy, 2010,
10 SeetheimplementationofstdUniform inSection3.2forthefulldefinition.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 9
Lem. 2 and Lem. 3). A distribution µ ∈ M(X) on computable metric space
(X,d,S) is computable iff it is samplable.
Thus we can equivalently specify computable distributions by writing sam-
pling algorithms.
3 A Library for Computable Distributions
How do we implement continuous distributions as a library in a general-
purpose programming language? Our goal in this section is to translate the
concepts about reals and distributions we saw previously in Section 2 into
code. Towards this end, we sketch a Haskell library (Figure 1) that encodes
realsandthesamplingviewofdistributions.11 Weemphasizethatthelibrary
does not assume any reals, continuous distributions, or operations on them
as black-box primitives.
3.1 Library
The library consists of three modules. The first module ApproxLibprovides
the interface for computable metric spaces. The second module RealLib
implements reals using the operations in ApproxLib and the third module
CompDistLib implements (continuous) distributions. We go over the mod-
ules in turn now.
As we mentioned previously,themoduleApproxLibprovides abstractions
for expressing elements as a sequence of approximations in a computable
metric space. The core type exposed by the module is Approx τ, which
models an element of a computable metric space and can be read as an
approximation by a sequence of values of type τ. For example, a real can
be given the type Real, ApproxRat, meaning it is a sequence of rationals
(Rat) that converges to a real. We form values of type Approx τ using
mkApprox :: (Nat → α) → Approx α, which requires us to check12 that the
function we are coercing describes a fast Cauchy sequence, and project out
approximations using nthApprox:: Approxα→ Nat→ α.
In order to form the type Approx τ, values of type τ should support
the operations required of a computable metric space. We can indicate the
required operations using Haskell’s type-class mechanism.
11 Thecodeisavailableathttps://github.com/danehuang/cdist-sketch.
12 We do not use the Haskell type system to enforce that the function to coerce contains a fast
Cauchysequence sothecallerofmkApproxneeds toperformthischeck manually.
10 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
module ApproxLib (Approx(..), CMetrizable(..),
mkApprox, nthApprox) where
newtype Approx a = Approx { getApprox :: Nat -> a }
mkApprox :: (Nat -> a) -> Approx a -- fast Cauchy
sequence
nthApprox :: Approx a -> Nat -> a -- project n-th
approx.
class CMetrizable a where
enum :: [a] -- countable,
dense subset
metric :: a -> a -> Approx Rat -- computable
metric
module CompDistLib (RandBits, Samp(..), mkSamp) where
import ApproxLib
type RandBits = Nat -> Bool
newtype Samp a = Samp { getSamp :: RandBits -> a }
mkSamp :: (CMetrizable a) => (RandBits -> Approx a) ->
Samp (Approx a)
mkSamp = Samp
instance Monad Samp where
... -- see text
Figure 1 A Haskell library interface for expressing approximations in a computable
metric space (module ApproxLib) and encoding (continuous) distributions (module
CompDistLib).Thelibraryinterfaceforreals(moduleRealLib)isnotshown.
class CMetrizable a where
enum :: [a]
metric :: a -> a -> Approx Rat
As a reminder, Haskell has lazy semantics so that the type [α] denotes
a stream as opposed to a list. Thus enum corresponds to an enumeration
of type α where α is the type of the dense subset. When we implement an
instanceofCMetrizableτ,weshouldcheckthattheimplementationofenum
enumerates a dense subset and metric computes a metric as a computable
metric space requires (see Section 2.2).
Below, we give an instance of ApproxRat for computable reals.
instance CMetrizable Rat where
enum = 0 : [ toRational m / 2^n
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 11
| n <- [1..]
, m <- [-2^n * n..2^n * n]
, odd m || abs m > 2^n * (n-1) ]
metric x y = A (\_ -> abs (x - y))
This instance enumerates the dyadic rationals, which are a dense subset
of the reals. Note that there are many other choices here for the dense
enumeration.13 In this instance, we can actually compute the metric as a
dyadic rational, whereas a computable metric requires the weaker condition
that we can compute the metric as a computable real.
Next, we can use the module ApproxLib to implement computable op-
erations on commonly used types. For example, a library for computable
reals will contain the CMetrizable τ instance implementation above and
other computable functions. However, some operations are not realizable
(e.g., equality of reals) and so this module does not contain all operations
one may want to perform on reals (e.g., equality is defined on floats).
module RealLib (Real, pi, (+), ...) where
import ApproxLib
type Real = Approx Rat
instance CMetrizable Rat where
...
pi :: Real
(+) :: Real -> Real -> Real
-- etc.
The module CompDistLib contains the implementation of distributions.
A sampler Sampα is a function from a bit-stream to values of type α.14
type RandBits = Nat -> Bool
newtype Samp a = Samp { getSamp :: RandBits -> a }
We can implement an instance of the sampling monad as below.
instance Monad Samp where
return x = Samp (const x)
(>>=) s f = Samp ((uncurry (getSamp . f)) . (pair
(getSamp s . fst) snd) . split)
where pair f g = \x -> (f x, g x)
split = pair even odd
even u = (\n -> u (2 * n))
odd u = (\n -> u (2 * n + 1))
Asexpected,returncorrespondstoaconstantsampler(const)thatignores
13 Algorithmsthatoperateoncomputablemetricspacescomputebyenumerationsothealgorithm
issensitivetothechoiceofenumeration.
14 ThetypeRandBits isrepresentedisomorphicallyasNat→Boolinsteadof[Bool].
12 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
itsinputrandomness.Thebindoperator>>=correspondstoacompositionof
samplers; we first split (split) the input randomness into two independent
streams (via even and odd), use one to sample from s, and continue with
the other in f.
ThemoduleCompDistLibprovides thefunction mkSampto coerce an arbi-
trary Haskell function of the appropriate type into a value of type Sampα.
mkSamp :: (CMetrizable a) => (RandBits -> Approx a) ->
Samp (Approx a)
mkSamp = Samp
We should call mkSamp only on sampling functions realizing Type-2 com-
putable sampling algorithms.
3.2 Examples
We now encode discrete and continuous distributions using the constructs
provided by library. These examples demonstrate how familiar distributions
usedin probabilisticmodelingcan beencodedinaType-2computableman-
ner. As we walk through the examples, we will encounter some semantic
issues that we would like a denotational semantics of probabilistic programs
to handle. We will flag these in italics and revisit them after introducing a
semantics for probabilistic programs (Section 5).
Discrete distribution Discrete distributions are much simpler compared
to continuous distributions. Nevertheless, when paired with recursion, se-
mantic issues do arise. For instance, consider the encoding of a geometric
distribution with bias 1/2, which returns the number of fair Bernoulli trials
until a success. The distribution stdBernoulli denotes a Bernoulli distri-
bution with bias 1/2.
stdGeometric :: Samp Nat
stdGeometric = do
b <- stdBernoulli
if b then return 1
else stdGeometric >>= return . (\n -> n + 1)
Onepossibility,althoughitoccurswithzeroprobability,isforthedrawfrom
stdBernoullitoalwaysbefalse.Consequently,stdGeometricdivergeswith
probability zero. A semantics should clarify the criterion for divergence and
show that this recursive encoding actually denotes a geometric distribution.
Continuous distributions Next, we fill in the sketch of the standard uni-
form distribution we presented earlier. As a reminder, we need to convert a
random bit-stream into a sequence of (dyadic) rational approximations.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 13
stdUniform :: Samp Real
stdUniform = mkSamp (\u -> mkApprox (\n -> bisect (n
+1) u 0 1 0))
where
bisect n u (l :: Rat) (r :: Rat) m
| m < n && u m =
bisect n u l (midpt l r) (m+1)
| m < n && not (u m) =
bisect n u (midpt l r) r (m+1)
| otherwise =
midpt l r
midpt l r = l + (r - l) / 2
The function bisect repeatedly bisects an interval specified by (l,r). By
construction, the sampler produces a sequence of dyadic rationals. We can
see that this sampling function is uniformly distributed because it inverts
thebinaryexpansionspecifiedbytheuniformlydistributedinputbit-stream.
Once we have the standard uniform distribution, we can encode other prim-
itive distributions (e.g., normal, exponential, etc.) as transformations of the
uniform distribution as in standard statistics using return and bind.
For example, we give an encoding of the standard normal distribution
using the Marsaglia polar transformation.
stdNormal :: Samp Real
stdNormal = do
u1 <- uniform (-1) 1
u2 <- uniform (-1) 1
let s = u1 * u1 + u2 * u2
if s < 1 then return (u1 * sqrt (log s / s))
else stdNormal
The distribution uniform(−1) 1 is the uniform distribution on the interval
(−1,1)andcanbeencodedbyshiftingandscalingadrawfromstdUniform.
One subtle issue here concerns the semantics of <. As a reminder, equality
on reals is not decidable. Consequently, although we have used < at the type
Real→ Real→ Bool in the example, it cannot have the standard semantics
of deciding between < and ≥.
Singular distribution Next, we give an encoding of the Cantor distribu-
tion. The Cantor distribution is singular so it is not a mixture of a discrete
componentandacomponentwithadensity.Perhapssurprisingly,thisdistri-
bution is computable. The distribution can be defined recursively. It starts
by trisecting the unit interval, and placing half the mass on the leftmost
interval and the other half on the rightmost interval, leaving nomass for the
middle, continuing in the same manner with each remaining interval that
14 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
has positive probability. We can encode the Cantor distribution by directly
transforming a random bit-stream into a sequence of approximations.
cantor :: Samp Real
cantor = mkSamp (\u -> mkApprox (\n -> go u 0 1 0 n))
where
go u (left :: Rat) (right :: Rat) n m
| n < m && u n =
go u left (left + pow) (n + 1) m
| n < m && not (u n) =
go u (right - pow) right (n + 1) m
| otherwise =
right - (1 / 2) * pow
where pow = 3 ^^ (-n)
The sampling algorithm keeps track of which interval it is currently in spec-
ified by left and right. If the current bit is 1, we trisect the left interval.
Otherwise, we trisect the rightmost interval. The number of trisections is
bounded by the precision we would like to generate the sample to. Cru-
cially, the encoding makes use of the idea of generating a sample to arbitrary
accuracy using a representation instead of the sample in its entirety.
Partiality and distributions The next series of examples explores issues
concerning distributions and partiality.
botSamp :: (CMetrizable a) => Samp (Approx a)
botSamp = botSamp
botSampBot :: (CMetrizable a) => Samp (Approx a)
botSampBot = mkSamp (\_ -> bot)
where bot = bot
In the term botSamp, we define an infinite loop at the type of samplers.
Intuitively, this corresponds to the case where we fail to provide a sampler,
i.e.,an error in the worst possibleway. Inthe term botSampBot,we produce
a sampler that fails to generate a sample to any precision. In other words,
we provide a sampler that is faulty in the worst possible way. We can try to
observe the differences in the implementation (if any).
alwaysDiv :: Samp Real neverDiv :: Samp Real
alwaysDiv = do neverDiv = do
_ <- botSamp :: _ <- botSampBot ::
Samp Real Samp Real
stdUniform stdUniform
If we run the term alwaysDiv on the left, we will see that the program
always diverges. When we run the term neverDivon the right, we will draw
from the sampler botSampBot but discard the result. Due to Haskell’s lazy
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 15
semantics, this computation is ignored and the entire term behaves as a
standard uniform distribution. We would like a denotational semantics to
reflect the differences in the operational behavior between these two terms.
Commutativity and independence We end by considering the differ-
ence between a sampling and distributional interpretation of probabilistic
programs. Below, we give equivalent encodings of distributions by commut-
ingthe order of sampling from independentdistributions,butleaving every-
thing else fixed.
myNormal :: Samp Real myNormal’ :: Samp Real
myNormal = do myNormal’ = do
x <- normal (-1) 1 y <- normal (1) 1
y <- normal (1) 1 x <- normal (-1) 1
return (x + y) return (x + y)
From a sampling perspective, the two distributions are not strictly equiv-
alent because the stream of random bits is consumed in a different order;
consequently,thesamplesproducedbymyNormalandmyNormal’maybedif-
ferent. Thus, while a sampling semantics is easily implementable, we would
also like a distributional semantics to enable reasoning about the distribu-
tional equivalence of programs. For instance, this would enable us to reason
that two different sampling algorithms for the same distribution are equiva-
lent.
3.3 Notes
The implementation we have sketched is a proof of concept that shows that
we can realize the interface by implementing computable distributions and
operations on them as Haskell code. We note that there are multiple ap-
proaches to coding up Type-2 computability as a library. One prominent
alternative is given by synthetic topology (Escard´o, 2004), which assumes
that the function space in the programming language used to code up topo-
logical results is continuous and derives the notion of an open set. These
ideas can be used to help us structure an implementation.
One shortcoming of the library, and implementations of Type-2 com-
putability more generally, is efficiency. We intend the presentation of the
library as a means to sketch the connection of the computation with the
mathematics. In practice, there are still reasons for using floating point
arithmetic. First, inference algorithms are computationally intensive, even
assuming operations on reals and distributions are constant-time, so one is
willingtomaketradeoffsforefficiency.Second,itisnotnecessarytocompute
16 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
answerstoarbitraryaccuracy formostapplications. Notably, mostinference
algorithmsalreadymakeapproximationsasthesolutionstomanyinteresting
models are analytically intractable. Thus, there is still a (large) gap in prac-
tice between semantics and implementation. For ideas on how to implement
Type-2 computability efficiently, we refer the reader to Bauer and Kavkler
(2008) and Lambov (2007).
Lastly, in our description of the library, we have elided one important
detail. One computable function we need to encode is the modulus of a com-
putable function between computable metric spaces. Themodulus g :(X →
Y) → N → N of a computable function f : X → Y between computable
metric spaces (X,d ,S ) and (Y,d ,S ) is a function that computes the
X X Y Y
numberofinputapproximationsconsumedtoproduceanoutputapproxima-
tion to a specified precision. For example, if the algorithm realizing f looks
at sX,...,sX to compute an output sY such that d (sY ,f(x)) < 2−(n+1)
i0 i41 in Y in
and (sX ) → x, then the modulus g(f)(n) is 42. Within a machine
im m∈N
model, one can simply “look at the tape and head location” to obtain the
modulus. However, one can show that the modulus of continuity is not ex-
pressibleinafunctionally-extensional language. Thisinessence follows from
the fact that the modulus of two extensionally equivalent functions may not
be equivalent. We can use Haskell’s imprecise exceptions mechanism (see
Peyton Jones et al., 1999), an impure feature, in a restricted manner to ex-
press the modulus.15
4 Mathematical Structures for Modeling the Library
What mathematical structures can we use to model such a library? Now that
we have seen that we can implement reals and continuous distributions in
code, our next task is to find mathematical structures that can be used to
faithfullymodeltheimplementation. Indoingso,wewillsetourselves upfor
givingdenotational semantics toprobabilisticprogramsundertheadditional
constraint that the model takes computability into account (Section 5).
Towards this end, we review topological domains, an alternative to tradi-
tionaldomaintheory(Section4.1).Topologicaldomainssupportallthestan-
darddomain-theoretic constructions needed tomodelPCF-like languages as
well as capture the notion of Type-2 computability, and hence, can form the
basis of a semantics for PCF-like languages. Next, we encode distributions
as topological domains. We do this for a sampling view (Section 4.2) and a
distributionalview(Section4.3)basedonvaluations,atopologicalvariantof
15 Seehttp://math.andrej.com/2006/03/27/sometimes-all-functions-are-continuous.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 17
ameasure.Wealsoconstructaprobabilitymonad(Giry,1982)oncountably
based topological (pre)domains, which includes computable metric spaces,
so we can model the monadic implementation of distributions in the library.
Finally, we put the approach proposed here, which emphasizes Type-2
computability,inperspective.Webeginbyexploringanalternativeapproach
to capturing Type-2 computability via realizability (Section 4.4). Roughly
speaking, we can view a constructive logic as a “programming language”
that we can use to program computable distributions. We end by reviewing
alternative structuresthatcan beusedtomodelthesemantics of probabilis-
tic programs (Section 4.5).
4.1 Domains and Type-2 Computability
In this section, we review topological domains. Unlike a CPO, a topological
domain in general does not carry the Scott topology, and hence, does not
consider the partial order primary. Instead, topological domains start with
the topology as primary and derive the order. For a complete treatment,
we refer the reader to Battenfeld (2008) and the references within (e.g., see
Battenfeld, 2004; Battenfeld et al., 2006, 2007). Towards this end, we will
follow the overview given by Battenfeld et al. (2007) to introduce the main
ideas, which constructs topological domains in two steps: (1) connecting
computability to topology and (2) relating topology to order. Most of this
overview can be skimmed upon a first read, although the examples will be
helpful. At the end, we will summarize the relevant structure that makes
topological domains good candidates for modeling probabilistic programs.
In Section 5, we will use this structure to give semantics to a core language.
Computability to topology Topological domain theory starts with the
observation that topological spaces provide a good model of datatypes. In
short, a point in a topological space corresponds to an inhabitant of a
datatypeandtheopensetsofthetopologydescribetheobservableproperties
of points. Consequently, one can test if an inhabitant of a datatype satisfies
an observableproperty by performinga (potentially diverging) computation
that tests if the point is contained in an open set. To make use of this obser-
vation, topological domain theory buildsoff of theCartesian closed category
of qcb spaces16 (e.g., see Escard´o et al., 2004), a subcategory of topological
0
spaces that makes the connection between computation and topology pre-
cise. It is helpful to introduce a qcb space by way of a represented space
0
16 qcb0 stands foraT0 quotient ofacountablybasedspace.
18 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
which starts with the idea of realizing computations on a machine model
before adding back the topological structure.
Definition 4.1. A represented space (X,δ ) is a pair of a set X with a
X
partial surjective function δ : 2ω ⇀ X called a representation.
X
We call p ∈ 2ω a name of x when δ (p) = x. Thus, a name encodes an
X
element of the base set X as a bit-stream which in turn can be computed
on by a Turing machine. A realizer for a function f : (X,δ ) → (Y,δ )
X Y
is a (partial) function F : 2ω ⇀ 2ω such that δ (F(p)) = f(δ (p)) for
Y X
p∈ dom(f◦δ ). A function f :X → Y between represented spaces is called
X
computable if it has a computable realizer. It is called continuous if it has a
continuous realizer (with respect to the Cantor topology).17 Unfolding the
definition of continuity of a (partial) function f :2ω ⇀ 2ω on Cantor space
shows that it encodes a finite prefix property—this means that a machine
can compute f(p) to arbitrary precision after consuming a finite amount of
bits of p in finite time when f is continuous.
In order to relate the machine-model view to a topology so we can define
a qcb space, we will need a notion of an admissible representation. A rep-
0
resentation δ of X is admissible if for any other representation δ′ of X,
X X
theidentify function on X has a continuous realizer (Battenfeld et al.,2007,
Defn. 3.10).
Definition 4.2. Aqcb space isarepresentedspace(X,δ )withadmissible
0 X
representation δ .
X
The topology is the quotient topology (or final topology) induced by the
representation δ . If X and Y are qcb spaces, then the topologically con-
X 0
tinuous functions between them coincide with those that have continuous
realizers (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Cor. 3.13), which gives the same charac-
terization as an admissible represented space. We give two examples of qcb
0
spaces to illustrate the corresponding realizers and topologies.
Example 4.3. Define the set S , {⊥,⊤} with representation δ (⊥) ,
S
00... and δ (⊤) , p for p 6= 00.... Then (S,δ ) is a qcb space known
S S 0
as Sierpinski space. In particular, Sierpinski space encodes the notion of
semi-decidability—a Turing machine semi-decides that a proposition holds
(encoded as ⊤) only if it eventually outputs a non-zero bit.
Example4.4. Let(X,d,S)beacomputablemetricspace.Then(X,δ )
Metric
17 Note that a continuous function f : X → Y between represented spaces does not mean that
f :X →Y isa topologically continuous function with respect to the final topologies induced
bytherespectiverepresentations.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 19
is a qcb space with admissible representation δ that uses fast Cauchy
0 metric
sequencesasnames.Moreconcretely,(δ (w )) → δ (p)whereδ(p) =
Q n n∈N metric
h w ,w ,... i. As a special case, (R,δ ) is a represented space, where δ is
1 2 R R
a representation that uses fast Cauchy sequences of rationals as names.
Topology to order The next piece of structure topological domain theory
imposes is the order-theoretic aspect. The idea is to use the standard in-
terpretation of recursive functions as the least upper bound of an ascending
chainof theapproximate functionsobtained byunfolding.Becausetopologi-
caldomaintheorytakes thetopology as primaryandtheorderassecondary,
this task requires some additional work.
Recallthatwecanconvertatopologicalspaceintoapreorderedsetviathe
specialization preorder, which orders x ⊑ y if every open set that contains x
also contains y. We write S to convert a topological space into a preordered
set. Intuitively, x ⊑ y if x contains less information than y. For a metric
space, we can always find an open ball that separates two distinct points x
and y (because the distance between two distinct points is positive). Hence,
the specialization preorder of a metric space always gives the discrete order
(i.e., information ordering), and hence degenerately, a CPO.
Definition 4.5. (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Defn. 5.1). A qcb space is called
0
a topological predomain if every ascending chain (x ) (with respect to
i i∈N
the specialization preorder ⊑) has an upper bound x such that (x ) → x
i i∈N
(with respect to its topology).
Thus, we see in the definition that a topological predomain (1) builds off of
a qcb space and (2) ensures that least upper bounds of increasing chains
0
exist. The former condition provides the topology and theory of effectivity
while the latter condition prepares us for modeling least fixed-points. The
following provides a useful characterization of qcb spaces that relates the
0
topology back to the order.
Definition 4.6. (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Defn. 5.3). A topological space
(X,O(X)) is a monotone convergence space if its specialization order is a
CPO and every open is Scott open.
Proposition 4.7. (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Prop. 5.4). A qcb space is a
0
topological predomain iff it is a monotone convergence space.
Hence, we see that the Scott topology is in general finer than the topology
associated with a topological predomain.
Analogous to standard domain theory, a topological predomain is called a
20 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
topological domain if it has least element, written ⊥,underits specialization
order (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Defn. 5.6).
Proposition 4.8. (Battenfeld et al., 2007, Thm. 5.7). Every continuous
endofunction on a topological domain has a least fixed-point.
We look at the relation between order and topology more closely through
a series of examples below.
Example 4.9. Consider the discrete CPO (N,⊑ ) with discrete or-
discrete
dering ⊑ , (i.e., n ⊑ m if n = m). The Scott topology on this
discrete discrete
CPO gives the discrete topology, i.e., O(N)= {{n} | n ∈N}. The specializa-
tion preorder applied to the resulting topology gives back the original CPO.
Thus, we additionally see that the topological predomain coincides with the
CPO.
Example 4.10. Consider the CPO ({[a,1) | a ∈ R} ∪ {[0,1]},⊆) with
ordering given by set inclusion. The Scott topology on this CPO gives the
lower topology,i.e.,O([0,1]) = {(a,1] | a ∈ [0,1)}∪{[0,1]}. Liketheprevious
example, the specialization preorder applied to the resulting topology gives
back the original CPO. Hence, the topological domain also coincides with
the CPO.
In the two examples above, we saw instances where the order and topology
coincide. In the next two examples, we will see cases where they differ, thus
highlighting differences between CPOs and topological (pre)domains.
Example 4.11. The reals R with Euclidean topology is a metric space,
and hence, the specialization preorder gives a discrete CPO (R,⊑ ).
discrete
However, the Scott topology of the resulting discrete CPO is the discrete
topology. Hence, the topologies do not coincide.
Example 4.12. The Scott continuous functions from R to R contain all
functions. However, the space of functions between the topological predo-
mains R and R contain just the continuous ones.
The last example concerns modeling divergence for reals.
Example4.13. Thepartial reals R˜ (e.g.,seeEscard´o,1996)canbemodeled
as (closed) intervals [l,u] ordered by reverse inclusion where l is a lower-real
and a u is an upper-real. The subspace of the maximal elements yields the
familiar Euclidean topology. Note that R˜ 6= R .
⊥ ⊥
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 21
Construction D×E D ⇒E D+E D⊗E D ⇛E D⊕E D⊥
TP X+ X+ X+ X
TD X+ X+ X X X X
TD! X+ X X X+ X+ X
Figure 2 Summary of constructs on topological predomains (category TP), topologi-
cal domains (category TD), and topological domains with strict morphisms (category
TD !). (Compare this figure with one for CPOs (AbramskyandJung, 1994, pg. 46).)
ThesymbolXindicatesthatthecategoryisclosedunderthatconstructandthesymbol
+additionallyindicates thatitcorrespondstotheappropriatecategorical construct.
Categorical structure We end by summarizing the categorical structure
of topological domains (Figure 2) applicable to giving semantics to prob-
abilistic programs.18 In short, topological (pre)domains possess essentially
the same categorical structure as their CPO counterparts. Hence, we will be
able to give semantics to programming languages using topological domains
in much the same way that we use CPOs.
The relevant categories include TP (topological predomains and continu-
ousfunctions),19 TD(topological domainsandcontinuous functions),20 and
TD (topologicaldomainsandstrictcontinuousfunctions).21 Wewillusethe
!
notation below for categorical constructions with the usual semantics.
(Function) We write D ⇒ E for continuous functions (D ⇛ E for strict
continuous functions); the corresponding operation includes eval : (D ⇒
E) ×D ⇒ E, uncurry : (D ⇒ E ⇒ F) ⇒ (D ×E ⇒ F), and curry :
(D×E ⇒ F) ⇒ D ⇒ E ⇒ F. We will subscript function space ⇒ with
the appropriate category when it is not clear from context which function
space we are referring to, e.g., D ⇒ E.
TD
(Product) We write D×E for products (D⊗E for smash products);22 the
corresponding operations include first projection π :D×E ⇒ D, second
1
projection π : D ×E ⇒ E, and pairing h·,·i : (D ⇒ E)×(D ⇒ F) ⇒
2
(D ⇒ E ×F).
(Lift) D lifts a (pre)domain; the corresponding operations include lifting
⊥
elements ⌊·⌋ : D ⇒ D , lifting the domain of a function lift : (D ⇒
⊥ D
E )⇒ (D ⇒ E ), lifting the codomain of a function lift : (D ⇒ E) ⇒
⊥ ⊥ ⊥ C
18 We include sums (D+E) and coalesced sums (D⊕E) for completeness. Similar to a smash
product, acoalescedsumD⊕E identifies theleastelementofD withtheleastelementofE.
19 TP is a full reflective exponential ideal of QCB (category with qcb0 spaces as objects and
continuous functionsasmorphisms)(Battenfeldetal.,2007,Thm.5.5).
20 TD is an exponential ideal of QCB and is closed under countable products in
QCB(Battenfeldetal.,2007,Thm.5.9).
21 TD ! (1) is countably complete (limits inherited from QCB), (2) has countable coprod-
ucts, and (3) ⊕ and ⇛ (with S as unit) provides symmetry monoidal closed structure on
TD ! (Battenfeld etal.,2007,Thm.6.1,Thm.6.2,Prop.6.4).
22 AsmashproductD⊗E identifiestheleastelementofD withtheleastelementofE.
22 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
(D ⇒ E ), and unlifting elements ⌈·⌉ : D ⇒ D for D (⌈⌊d⌋⌉ = d and
⊥ ⊥
undefined otherwise). Given a morphism f :D ⇒ E, we write f : D ⇒
⊥ ⊥
E to refer to the morphism with lifted domain and codomain.
⊥
4.2 Sampling
As areminder,thelibrary implementation converts an inputbit-stream into
a sample in the desired space. Hence, we begin by encoding the sampling
implementation of distributions from the library as a topological domain.
Define an (endo)functor S that sends a topological predomain D to a
sampler on D and a morphism to one that composes with the underlying
sampler. Then, the topological domain S(D) is a sampler producing values
in the lifted topological domain D .
⊥
Proposition 4.14. The functor S defined as
S(D : TP), 2ω ⇒ D
⊥
S(f :D ⇒ E) , s 7→ f ◦s,
⊥
is well-defined, where 2ω is the topological predomain equipped with the Can-
tor topology.
The least element is one that maps all bit-streams to ⊥. Next, we define
three operations on samplers. The first operation creates a sampler that
ignores its input bit-randomness and always returns d:
det :D ⇒ S(D)
det(d) , const(⌊d⌋)
where const : D ⇒ (E ⇒ D) produces a constant function.
The second operation splits an input bit-stream u into the bit-streams
indexed by the even indices u and the odd indices u :
e o
split: 2ω ⇒ 2ω ×2ω
split(u) ,(u ,u ).
e o
Note that if u is a sequence of independent and identically distributed bits,
then both u and u will be as well.
e o
The third operation sequences two samplers:
samp : S(D)×(D ⇒ S(E)) ⇒ S(E)
samp(s,f), uncurry(lift (f))◦hs◦π ,π i◦split.
D 1 2
It splits the input bit-randomness and runs the sampler s on one of the
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 23
bit-streams obtained by splitting to produce a value. That value is fed to
f, which in turn produces a sampler that is run on the other bit-stream
obtained by splitting.
4.3 Valuations and a Probability Monad
Our goal now is encode distributions as valuations in the framework of
topological domains. Once we have done so, we can interpret distribution
termsinthelibraryaselements oftheappropriatetopologicaldomain.Next,
wedefinetheprobabilitymonad,whichwillberestricted tocountably based
topological (pre)domains. Consequently, the probability monad in λ will
CD
be restricted to distributions on countably based spaces, which includes
commonly used spaces such as reals and products of countably based spaces
(Section 5).
Valuations and measures A valuation shares many of the same prop-
erties as a measure, and hence, can be seen as a topological variation of
distribution.
Definition 4.15. A valuation ν : O(X) → [0,1] is a function that assigns
to each open set of a topological space X a probability such that it is (1)
strict (ν(∅) = 0), (2) monotone (ν(U) ≤ ν(V) for U ⊆ V), and (3) modular
(ν(U)+ν(V)= ν(U ∪V)+ν(U ∩V) for every open U and V).
One key difference between valuations and measures is that valuations are
not required to satisfy countable additivity. Indeed, countable additivity
is perhaps one of the defining features of a measure. We can rectify this
situation for valuations by restricting attention to the ω-continuous valua-
tions. As a reminder, a valuation ν is called ω-continuous if ν( V ) =
n∈N n
sup ν(V )for (V ) an increasing sequenceof opens.Hence, thecount-
n∈N n n n∈N
S
able additivity of µ encodes the ω-continuous property. Importantly, note
that every Borel measure µ can be restricted to the lattice of opens, written
µ| , resulting in an ω-continuous valuation. Every Borel measure µ on
O(X)
X can be restricted to an ω-continuous valuation µ| : [O⊆(X) ⇒
O(X) CPO
[0,1]↑] (see Schro¨der, 2007, Sec. 3.1). Moreover, µ is uniquely determined
by its restriction to the opens µ| .23 In other words, we can identify
O(X)
distributions on topological spaces with ω-continuous valuations.
23 Note that the ω-continuous condition encodes what it means for a function to be ω-Scott
continuous, i.e.,anω-CPOcontinuous function.
24 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Encodingvaluations Thepresenceoftopologicalandorder-theoreticstruc-
ture suggests two strategies for encoding valuations as topological domains.
Inthefirstapproach,wewouldtakearealizer pointofviewaseverytopolog-
icaldomainis alsoaqcb space.Underthis approach,wewould(1) definean
0
admissiblerepresentation of the space of opens O(X), (2) definean admissi-
ble representation of the interval [0,1], and (3) verify that a representation
of a valuation O(X) → [0,1] using the canonical function space representa-
tion is admissibleand properlyencodes avaluation. In thesecond approach,
we would take an order-theoretic point of view. Under this approach, we
would (1) verify that the space of opens O(X) is a topological domain, (2)
verify that the interval [0,1] is a topological domain, and (3) verify that the
continuous functions O(X) ⇒ [0,1] encodes a valuation correctly. In either
strategy, a common thread is that we need to encode the opens O(X) and
the interval [0,1]. We start with the realizer perspective.
Let C(X,S) bethe space of continuous functions between the represented
spaces X and S. Let [0,1] , ([0,1],δ ) be the represented space with
< <
representation δ that represents r ∈ [0,1] as all the rational lower bounds.
<
Next,wedefinetheopensO(X)andtheinterval[0,1] fortheorder-theoretic
perspective. Let O⊆(X) , (O(X),⊆) be the lattice of opens (and hence a
CPO) of a topological space X ordered by subset inclusion. Let [0,1]↑ ,
([0,1],≤)betheinterval[0,1]orderedby≤.Thenextpropositionshowsthat
the realizer perspective and the order-theoretic perspective are equivalent.
Proposition 4.16.
(i) [0,1] ∼ =[0,1]↑ and
<
(ii) C(X,S) ∼ = O⊆(X) when X is an admissible represented space.24
The next proposition shows that the realizer and order-theoretic views are
equivalent under the additional assumption that the base topological space
is countably based.
Proposition 4.17. Let (X,O(X)) be a countably based topological space.
(i) [O⊆(X) ⇒ [0,1]↑]∼ = C(O(X),[0,1] ) and
CPO <
(ii) [O⊆(X) ⇒ [0,1]↑]∼ = [O⊆(X) ⇒ [0,1]↑].25
CPO TD
Proposition 4.17 gives three equivalent views of a valuation as (1) a CPO
continuous function, (2) a continuous map between represented spaces, and
24 TheseconditemisduetoSchro¨der(2007,Thm.3.3).
25 ThefirstitemisduetoSchro¨der(2007,Sec.3.1,Thm3.5,Cor.3.5).Fortheseconditem,recall
that every ω-continuous pointed CPO with its Scott topology coincides with a topological
domain(Battenfeldetal.,2007). Theleastelement isthe valuationthat mapseveryopen set
to0.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 25
(3) a continuous function between topological domains. View (2) indicates
that there is an associated theory of effectivity on valuations. We will use
this view to give semantics to probabilistic programs.
Integration Similar to how one can integrate a measurable function with
respect to a measure, one can integrate a lower semi-continuous function
with respect to a valuation. Let X be a represented space and µ ∈ M (X)
1
where M (X) is the collection of Borel measures on X that have total
1
measure 1.
Proposition 4.18. The integral of a lower semi-continuous function f ∈
C(X,[0,1] ) with respect to a Borel measure µ
<
:C(X,[0,1] )×M (X) → [0,1]
< 1 <
Z
is lower semi-continuous (see Schro¨der, 2007, Prop. 3.6). In fact, it is even
lowersemi-computable (Schro¨der,2007,Prop.3.6)(Hoyrup and Rojas,2009,
Prop. 4.3.1).
Theintegralisdefinedinananalogous mannertotheLebesgueintegral, i.e.,
as the limit of step functions on opens instead of measurable sets. The inte-
gral possesses many of the same properties, including Fubini and monotone
convergence.
Probability monad Finally, we combine the results about valuations and
integration to define a probability monad. Let TP be the full subcategory
ω
ofTPwheretheobjectsarecountablybased.Definethe(endo)functorP on
countably based topological predomainsthatsendsan object D to thespace
of valuations on D and a morphism to one that computes the pushforward.
Proposition 4.19. The functor P defined as
P(D :TP ), O⊆(D) ⇒ [0,1]↑
ω
P(f :D ⇒ E) , µ 7→ µ◦f−1
is well-defined.
It is straightforward to check that P is a functor. We can construct a prob-
ability monad using the functor P.
Proposition 4.20. The triple (P,η,≻ ) is a monad, where
♭
η(x)(U) , 1 (x)
U
(µ ≻ f)(U) , f dµ where f (x) = f(x)(U).
♭ U U
Z
26 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
It is largely straightforward to check that (P,η,≻ ) is a monad.26
♭
4.4 Realizability
Sections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 taken together provide enough structure for giving
semanticstoprobabilisticprogramswithcontinuousdistributions.Thus,the
reader interested in seeing the semantics “in action” in a core language can
skip ahead to Section 5.
In this section, we explore another approach to Type-2 computability
based on realizability. The primary motivation for doing so is that we will
obtainanotherperspectiveoncomputability(i.e.,inadditiontothetopolog-
ical and order-theoretic ones) that highlights the connection with construc-
tive mathematics. Intuitively, we have a constructive object if we can realize
the object as a program. As another source of motivation, it is also possible
to give semantics to programming languages directly using the realizability
approach (e.g., see Longley, 1995). Hence, we will gain another method of
giving semantics in addition to the traditional order-theoretic one.
Under the realizability approach, we will approach Type-2 computability
using an abstract machine model, i.e., a partial combinatory algebra (PCA)
as opposed to a concrete machine model (i.e., a Turing machine). A PCA
consists of an underlying set X and a partial application function · : X ×
X ⇀ X subjectto certain laws that ensurecombinatorial completeness, i.e.,
that a PCA can simulate untyped lambda calculus. Hence, we can think
of a PCA as an algebraic take on substitution. We obtain ordinary Type-
1 computability by instantiating a PCA over the naturals N; the partial
application function of a PCA · : N × N ⇀ N can be defined to simulate
the computation of partial recursive functions. By extension, we obtain a
Type-2 machine by instantiating a PCA over Baire space B , N → N;
the partial application function of a PCA · : B×B ⇀ B can be defined to
simulatethecomputationoverstreamsofnaturals.Intherestofthissection,
our goal is to unpack the (well-known) connection between computability
and constructive mathematics via realizability, and to show that the base
spaces andconstructions thatareusefulfor givingsemantics to probabilistic
programs with continuous distributions can be realized appropriately.
Overview Thephrasewe have in mindis: “Computability is the realizabil-
ity interpretation of constructive mathematics” (Bauer, 2005). The high-
level idea is to encode familiar mathematical objects in an appropriate logic
26 In the case of bind, we can check that the identities involving integrals holds via standard
arguments (e.g.,seeJones,1989).
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 27
and derive computability as a consequence of having a sound interpreta-
tion. Programming up mathematical spaces and their operations will then
correspond to encoding the space and their operations in the logic.
(Logic) Thelogicforoursettingiselementary analysis (e.g.,seeLietz,2004,
Sec. 1.3.3) called EL. EL extends an intuitionistic predicate logic with
(1) Heyting arithmetic, (2) a sort for Baire space Baire for encoding
continuum-sized objects, and (3) primitive-recursion and associated oper-
ators.
(Semantics) The semantics for this setting includes the category Asm(K )
2
of assemblies over Kleene’s second algebra K (i.e., a PCA over Baire
2
space)andthefullsubcategoryMod(K )ofmodestsetsoverK .Formore
2 2
details on assemblies and modest sets, we refer the reader to the relevant
literature (e.g., see Streicher, 2008; Bauer, 2000a; Birkedal, 1999). For
our purposes, it suffices to recall that a modest set can be identified with
a represented space and that an assembly is a represented space with a
multi-representation. Hence, modest sets model datatypes and assemblies
model intuitionistic logic.
Because we take a constructive vantage point, we will need to check that
the semantics induced by the relevant encodings of familiar mathematical
objectsinthelogiccoincideswiththeusualinterpretation.Forourpurposes,
thismeanschecking thatencodingsofobjects suchasreals anddistributions
in EL produce the expected semantics. Towards this end, recall that we can
associate a theory of effectivity with a space by defining it as a quotient of
B
Baire space by a partial equivalence relation (PER) ∼. A quotient by
∼
a PER allows us to construct quotients and subsets of Baire space in one
(cid:14)
go. We recall the conditions required of the relation ∼ for the constructive
encoding to coincide with the classical interpretation below.
Definition 4.21. (Lietz, 2004, Prop. 3.3.2). We write ∼∗ if
(RF conservative class) antecedents of implications contained in ∼ are al-
most negative;27
(partial equivalence relation) EL ⊢ sym(∼) ∧ trans(∼) where sym(∼) ,
∀αβ : Baire.α ∼ β ↔ β ∼ α and trans(∼) , ∀αβγ : Baire.α ∼ β →
β ∼ γ → α ∼ γ; and
(stability) EL ⊢∀xy : Baire.¬¬(x ∼ y) → x ∼ y.
27 Moreformally,wheneverA→Bisasubformulaof∼,thentheantecedantAisalmostnegative.
As a reminder, a formula is almost negative if it only contains existential quantifiers in front
ofprime(i.e.,atomic)formulas.
28 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Now we recall a sufficient condition for the constructive interpretation to
coincide with the classical interpretation.
Proposition 4.22. (Lietz,2004,Prop.3.3.2). If∼∗,thentheinterpretations
B
of inthecategoriesAsm(K )andAsm (K )(i.e.,thetruthorclassical
∼ 2 t 2
interpretation) yield computably equivalent realizability structures.
(cid:14)
Encodings Before proceeding to the encodings of the sets of interest in
EL, we define two enumerations that will be useful for constructing the
encodings. Let π hn,mi = n and π hn,mi = m so that they are pairing
1 2
functions on naturals (e.g., Cantor pairing function). We also overload the
notation hα,βi to pair α ∈ B and β ∈ B.
(Integers) Encode the integers as
N×N
Z =
=
N
where ha,bi = hc,di if a−d = c−b (e.g(cid:14)., as in Bauer, 2000a, Sec. 5.5.1).
N
In words, we can think of an integer as a difference of two naturals. We
write Int to refer to the enumeration on N×N.
(Rationals) Encode the rationals as
Z×(N\{0})
Q =
=
Q
(cid:14)
where hp,qi = hs,ti if p·t = s·q (e.g., as in Bauer, 2000a, Sec. 5.5.1).
Q
In words, we can think of a rational as a ratio of an integer and a non-
negativenatural.WewriteRattorefertotheenumerationonZ×(N\{0}).
We write ≤ and < to implement ≤ and < respectively on rationals.28
Q Q
(Non-negative rationals) Encode the non-negative rationals similarly to the
rationals, where we replace Z with N. We write NonNegRat to refer to
the enumeration on N×(N\{0}). We write < to implement < on the
Q+
non-negative rationals.
We now encode the base spaces as quotients of Baire space. In defining
the quotient ∼, it is helpful to recall the encoding of the space first. For
example, a lower real is an encoding of a real that enumerates all of its ra-
tional lower bounds.Hence, two lower reals will berelated if their encodings
enumerate the same lower bounds.As another example, we can encode reals
as a fast Cauchy sequences. Hence, two reals will be related if their fast
Cauchy sequences are suitably close to one another. We summarize useful
quotient encodings of base spaces below.
28 Notethatwehavethathp,qi<hs,tiifp·t<s·q (e.g.,asinBauer,2000a,Sec.5.5.1).
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 29
Proposition 4.23.
(Sierpinski) Let α∼ β if (∀n :Nat.αn =0) ↔ (∀n: Nat.βn = 0).
S
(Lower real) Let α ∼ β if ∀q : Rat.(∀n : Nat.q < αn) ↔ (∀n :
R< Q
Nat.q < βn).
Q
(Lower non-negative real) Letα ∼ β if∀q : NonNegRat.(∀n : Nat.q <
R+ Q+
<
αn)↔ (∀n : Nat.q < βn).
Q+
(Upper real) Let α ∼ β if ∀q : Rat.(∀n : Nat.αn < q) ↔ (∀n :
R> Q
Nat.βn < q).
Q
(Lifted partial real) Let hα ,α ,α ,α i∼ hβ ,β ,β ,β i if α ∼ β ∧
l u < > R˜ l u < > l R< l
α ∼ β ∧ α ∼ β ∧ α ∼ β .
u R> u < S < > S >
(Real) Let α ∼ β if ∀n :Nat.|αn−βn|≤ 2−n+2.
R Q
We have ∼∗, ∼∗ , ∼∗ , ∼∗ , ∼∗, and ∼∗.
S R< R+ R> R˜ R
<
Itislargelystraightforwardtocheckthat∼∗ holdsforthe∼definedabove.29
Next,westatethatsemanticconstructscanbeencodedasquotientsofBaire
space as well.
Proposition 4.24. Suppose ∼∗ and ∼∗ .
X Y
(Lift) Let hα ,α i ∼ hβ ,β i if α ∼ β ∧α ∼ β .
C X ⊥ C X C S C X X X
(Product) Let hα ,α i∼ hβ ,β i if α ∼ β ∧α ∼ β .
X Y X×Y X Y X X X Y Y Y
(Function) Let α ∼ β if ∀γ : Baire, α|γ ∼ β|γ where α|γ applies
X→Y Y
α to γ (in K ).
2
We have ∼∗, ∼∗ , and ∼∗ .
⊥ X×Y X→Y
It is straightforward to check that ∼∗ for the ∼ defined above.
We end by encoding valuations as quotients of Baire space. First, we need
an enumeration of the open sets of a topological space. For a topological
space (X,O(X)), we can encode the collection of open sets as the function
space X → S. As the measure of an open set is lower-semi computable
(Proposition 4.3), a valuation can be encoded as an enumeration of pairs of
abasicopenandanon-negativelowerreal.Foracountablybasedtopological
space with basis B(X), we have B(X) ∼ = N; hence, we can code a valuation
as a sequence of non-negative lower reals.
Proposition 4.25. Let hα ,α ,...i ∼ hβ ,β ,...i if ∀n : Nat.α ∼
1 2 V(X) 1 2 n R+
<
β . Then ∼∗ .
n V(X)
29 For Sierpinski,seeLietz(2004,Defn.3.2.4).Forreals,seeBauer (2000b,Sec.5.5.2). Itisalso
usefultorecallthenotionofanegativeformula(Bauer,2000b,pg.92)forcheckingthestability
of∼.
30 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Summary In summary, one view of what we have just seen is that we can
use EL as a “programming language” (i.e., a constructive logic as opposed
to Haskell) for coding up mathematical structures relevant for probabilistic
programs that have a notion of effectivity associated with them. In par-
ticular, the witnesses in the semantics of EL are given by elements of a
PCAand modest sets over K can beidentified with represented spaces (see
2
Battenfeld et al., 2007, Sec. 8).
4.5 Alternative Approaches
Probabilisticprogramshavealonghistory,andindeed,manystructureshave
been proposed for modeling their semantics. Naturally, the choice of mathe-
matical structure affects the language features that we can model. We close
this section by reviewing a few of these alternative approaches as a point
of comparison to the perspective given here that emphasizes Type-2 com-
putability. We will focus on denotational approaches. There are also opera-
tional approaches to modeling the semantics of probabilistic programs (e.g.,
see Park et al., 2005; Dal Lago and Zorzi, 2012).
OnenaturalideaistoextendsemanticsbasedonCPOstotheprobabilistic
setting by putting distributions on CPOs. Saheb-Djahromi (1978) develops
a probabilistic version of LCF by considering distributions on CPOs corre-
sponding to base types (i.e., booleans and naturals). Saheb-Djahromi also
gives operational semantics as a Markov chain (described as a transition
matrix) and shows that the operational semantics is equivalent to the deno-
tational semantics. Jones (1989), in her seminal work, develops the theory
of valuations on CPOs to further the study of distributions on CPOs via a
probabilistic powerdomain P. The probabilistic powerdomain is not closed
under the function space; consequently, Jones interprets the function space
D ⇒ E probabilistically as D ⇒ P(E) (not P(D) ⇒ P(E)).
Instead of taking order-theoretic structure as primary and extending it
with probabilistic concepts, another idea is to take the probabilistic struc-
ture as primary and derive structure that models programming language
constructs(e.g.,order-theoretic structureto modelrecursion).Kozen (1981)
takesastructureamenableformodelingprobabilityasprimary(i.e.,Banach
spaces)andimposesorder-theoretic structure.Thisapproach supportsstan-
dard continuous distributions, although it does not support higher-order
functions. In addition to the distributional semantics, Kozen also gives a
sampling semantics and shows it equivalent to the distributional semantics.
Danos and Ehrhard (2011) identify the category of probabilistic coherence
spaces (PCSs) and use it to give denotational semantics to a probabilistic
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 31
variantofPCFextendedwith(countable)choice.Hence,theirapproachsup-
ports discrete distributions. Ehrhard et al. (2014) show that PCSs provide
a fully abstract model for probabilistic PCF so that the connection between
the operational and denotational semantics is tight. Ehrhard et al. (2018)
identify a Cartesian closed category of measurable cones and stable, mea-
surable maps that is also order complete. They also provide an operational
sampling semantics and show an adequacy result to link the denotational
withoperationalsemantics.Thiscategory canbeusedtomodelhigher-order
probabilisticlanguages withcontinuousdistributionsandrecursion.Crubill´e
(2018) shows that the category of PCSs embeds into the (Cartesian closed)
category of measurable cones with stable, measurable maps.
One can also use measure-theoretic structure directly, although the cate-
gory of measurable spaces with measurable maps is not Cartesian closed so
higher-order functions cannot be modeled. Panangaden (1999) identifies a
category of stochastic relations and shows how to use it to give denotational
semantics to Kozen’s first-order while language. The category has measur-
able spaces as objects and probability kernels as morphisms. Panangaden
identifies (partially) additive structure in this category and uses it to inter-
pretfix-pointsforKozen’swhilelanguage.Borgstro¨m et al.(2011)alsointer-
pret a type as a measurable space and use it to give denotational semantics
to a first-order language without recursion based on measure transformers.
Theyalsoshow howto compilethis language into afactor graph,whichsup-
ports inference as well as provides an operational semantics. Staton (2017)
shows how the category of measurable spaces with s-finite kernels can be
used to give commutative semantics to a first-order language.
Anotherinterestingapproachconsidersalternativestoameasure-theoretic
treatmentofprobability,butstillconsiderstheprobabilisticstructureaspri-
mary. Heunen et al. (2017) develop the theory of quasi-Borel spaces, which
importantly, form a Cartesian closed category and show how quasi-Borel
spaces can be used to model a higher-order probabilistic language with con-
tinuous distributions but without recursion. V´ak´ar et al. (2019) show how
to extend quasi-Borel spaces with order-theoretic structure so they can be
used to model languages with recursion.
5 A Semantics for a Core Language
What does a semantics for a core language look like? Ourgoalinthissection
istousethemathematicalstructures(i.e.,topological domains)wereviewed
in the previous section to model a PCF-like language extended with reals
32 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
τ ::=Nat | τ →τ | τ ×τ | Real | Distτ
M ::=O | succ | pred | if0MMM (PCF-1)
| x | λx:τ.M | MN | fixM (PCF-2)
| (M,M) | fstM | sndM (products)
| r | rop (reals)
| dist | returnM | x←M ; M (distributions)
Figure3 λCD extendsaPCF-likelanguagewithproducts,reals,anddistributionsusing
aprobabilitymonad.Theconstructs forrealsanddistributionsareshaded.
and continuous distributions (via a probability monad) called λ . We be-
CD
gin by introducing the syntax and statics of λ (Section 5.1). As we might
CD
expect, the language features that we can model are restricted to the struc-
ture of the relevant topological domains. For instance, as we only define
a probability monad on countably based spaces, the probability monad in
λ will be restricted to supporting only distributions on countably based
CD
spaces. This includes distributions on reals and products of countably based
spaces, but does not include function spaces (although the language itself
contains higher-order functions). Next, we give both (algorithmic) sampling
and distributional semantics to λ (Section 5.2). This illustrates more
CD
concretely the connection between the semantics and the library implemen-
tation of computable distributions. The structure of the semantics follows
the usual one for PCF. Finally, we can use the core language and its seman-
tics to resolve the semantic issues we raised when we sketched a library for
computable distributions (Section 5.3).
5.1 Syntax and Statics
Syntax Thelanguage λ extends a PCF-like language with reals and dis-
CD
tributions (Figure 3). The terms on lines PCF-1 and PCF-2 are standard
PCF terms. The terms on the line marked products extend PCF with the
usualconstructionsforpairs;(M,N)formsapairoftermsM andN,fstM
takes the firstprojection of the pair M, and snd M takes the second projec-
tion of the pair M. The terms on the line marked reals add syntax for (1)
constant reals r and (2) the application of primitive real functions rop. The
terms on the line marked distributions add syntax for (1) primitive distribu-
tions dist and (2) return returnM and bindx ← M ; N for an appropriate
probability monad.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 33
⊢D τ Well-formed distribution type
⊢D τ1 ⊢D τ2
⊢D Nat ⊢D Real ⊢D τ1×τ2
Γ⊢M :τ Expression typing judgement
Γ⊢O:Nat Γ⊢succ:Nat→Nat Γ⊢pred:Nat→Nat
n
Ψ(r)=Real Ψ(rop)=Real →Real Γ⊢M1 :Nat Γ⊢M2,M3 :τ
n
Γ⊢r :Real Γ⊢rop:Real →Real Γ⊢n:if0M1M2M3 :τ
Γ(x)=τ Γ,x:τ1 ⊢M :τ2 Γ⊢M1 :τ2 →τ Γ⊢M2 :τ2
Γ⊢x:τ Γ⊢λx:τ1.M :τ1 →τ2 Γ⊢M1 M2 :τ
Γ⊢M :τ →τ Γ⊢M1 :τ1 Γ⊢M2 :τ2 Γ⊢M :τ1×τ2
Γ⊢fixM :τ Γ⊢(M1,M2):τ1×τ2 Γ⊢fstM :τ1
Γ⊢M :τ1×τ2 Ψ(dist)=Distτ ⊢D τ Γ⊢M :τ ⊢D τ
Γ⊢sndM :τ2 Γ⊢dist:Distτ Γ⊢returnM :Distτ
Γ⊢M1 :Distτ1 Γ,x:τ1 ⊢M2 :Distτ2 ⊢D τ1,τ2
Γ⊢x←M1 ; M2 :Distτ2
Figure4 Thetype-systemforλCD.Thejudgement⊢D τ checksthatdistributiontypes
arewell-formed.Thejudgement Γ⊢M :τ checks that expressions arewell-typed. The
judgement is parameterized by a context Ψ (omitted), which contains that types of
primitive distributions and functions. The typing rules for reals and distributions are
shaded.
Statics Like PCF, λ is a typed language. In addition to PCFtypes (i.e.,
CD
Nat and τ → τ), λ includes the type of products (τ ×τ), reals (Real),
CD
and distributions (Dist τ). Figure 4 summarizes the type-system for λ .
CD
The expression typing judgement Γ ⊢ M : τ is parameterized by a context
Ψ (omitted in the rules) that contains the types of primitive distributions
and functions.30 The typing rules for the fragments marked PCF-1, PCF-2,
and products is standard. The typing rules for the fragments marked reals
30 ThefullexpressiontypingjudgementwouldbewrittenΨ;Γ⊢M :τ.WeomitΨbecauseitis
constant acrosstypingrules.
34 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
VJNatK,N⊥
VJτ1 →τ2K,(VJτ1K⇒VJτ2K)⊥
VJτ1×τ2K,(VJτ1K×VJτ2K)⊥
VJRealK , R˜ ⊥
VJDistτK , {(s,psh (s))|s∈S(VJτK)}
VJτK
Figure5 TheinterpretationoftypesVJ·Kdenotestypesastopologicaldomains.Wehave
shaded the interpretation of reals and distributions. Note that we are using a call-by-
nameinterpretation.
and distributions are not surprising; nevertheless, we go over them as the
constructs are less standard.
As expected, constant reals r are assigned the type Real. Primitive oper-
ations on reals rop (for real operation) have the type Realn → Real where
Realn , Real×···×Real (n-times).
For expressions that operate on distributions, the judgement ⊢ τ addi-
D
tionally enforces that the involved types are well-formed. The distribution
type Distτ is well-formed if the space denoted by τ is a computable metric
space (Definition 2.9). This includes the type Nat, the type Real (Exam-
ple 2.10), and products of well-formed types τ ×τ .31
1 2
Given a term M that has a well-formed type, the construct return M
corresponds to return in a probability monad and returns a point-mass cen-
tered at M. The typing rule for x ← M ; N is the usual one for bind in
a probability monad. The rule first checks that M has type Dist τ and
1
that τ is well-formed. Next, the rule checks that N under a typing context
1
extended with x : τ has type Distτ and that τ is well-formed. The result
1 2 2
is an expression of type Dist τ .
2
5.2 Semantics
Interpretation of types The interpretation of types VJτK ∈ TD inter-
prets a type τ as a topological domain and is defined by induction on types
(Figure 5). The interpretation of types is similar to what one obtains from
a standard CPO call-by-name interpretation.
Forexample,theinterpretationofNatliftsthetopological domainN.This
is similar to the CPO interpretation of naturals as the lifted naturals. The
31 Asareminder,wecanalsosupportdistributionsonanycountably-basedspace(e.g.,distribu-
tionsondistributions),butrestrictourattention tothesetypes forsimplicity.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 35
interpretationoffunctionsandproductsaretheusualcall-by-name interpre-
tations,thedifferencebeingthatweusethetopologicaldomaincounterparts
instead.TheinterpretationofthetypeofrealsRealisaliftedpartialrealR˜
⊥
(recall Example 4.13).Theinterpretation of the typeof distributionsDistτ
is a pair of a sampler and a distribution such that the sampler realizes the
distribution. The (continuous) function psh : S(D) ⇒ P(D) computes
D
the pushforward32 and converts a sampler into its corresponding valuation.
The well-formed distribution judgement ⊢ τ ensures that the probability
D
monad P is applied to only the countably based topological domains.
Denotation function The expression denotation function EJΓ ⊢ M : τK :
VJΓK ⇒ VJτK (see Proposition 5.2) is defined by induction on the typing
derivation and is summarized in Figure 6. It is parameterized by a global
environment Υ that interprets constant reals r, primitive functions rop, and
primitivedistributionsdist.TheglobalenvironmentΥshouldbewell-formed
(definedshortly) with respect to the global context Ψ usedin theexpression
typing judgement. After we introduce the notion of a well-formed global
environment, we walk though the semantics and connect it with the library
implementation, with a particular focus on the relation between a sampling
and distributional view of probabilistic programs.
Well-formed global environment To ensure that we do not introduce
non-computable constants into λ (e.g., non-computable operations on
CD
reals rop) and that the constants have the appropriate types, the global
environment Υ should be well-formed with respect to the global context
Ψ. To distinguish the semantic value obtained from a global environment
lookup from the syntax, we will put a bar over the constant (e.g., Υ(r)= r¯)
to refer to the semantic value. We say that Υ is well-formed with respect to
Ψ, written Ψ ⊢ Υ, if the conditions below hold.
(real-wf) For any r ∈ dom(Ψ), Υ(r) is the realizer of a real r¯when Ψ(r) =
Real.
(dist-wf) For any dist ∈ dom(Ψ), Υ(dist) is the name of a pair dist that
realizes a sampler over values in VJτK and the corresponding distribution
when Ψ(dist)= Distτ.
(rop-wf) For any rop ∈ dom(Ψ), the corresponding semantic function rop is
strict, continuous on its domain, and a n-ary real-valued function on reals
when Ψ(rop) = Realn → Real.
32 Wehavethatpsh
D
(s),U 7→R 1 U(·)dµs whereµs ,µ iid◦s−1.
36 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
EJΓ⊢x:τK,πx
EJΓ⊢zero:NatK,liftC◦const◦Υ(zero)
EJΓ⊢succ:Nat→NatK,liftC◦const◦Υ(succ)
EJΓ⊢pred:Nat→NatK,liftC◦const◦Υ(pred)
EJΓ⊢λx:τ1.M :τ1 →τ2K,liftC◦curry(EJΓ,x:τ1 ⊢M :τ2K)
EJΓ⊢M1M2 :τ2K,eval◦hunlift(EJΓ⊢M1 :τ1 →τ2K),EJΓ ⊢M2 :τ1Ki
EJΓ⊢if0M1M2M3 :τK,if0◦hEJΓ⊢M1 :NatK,EJΓ⊢M2 :τK,EJΓ⊢M3 :τKi
EJΓ⊢fixM :τK,fix◦unlift(EJΓ⊢M :τ →τK)
EJΓ⊢(M1,M2):τ1×τ2K,liftC◦hEJΓ⊢M1 :τ1K,EJΓ⊢M2 :τ2K)i
EJfstΓ⊢M :τ1K,π1◦unlift◦EJΓ⊢M :τ1×τ2K
EJsndΓ⊢M :τ2K,π2◦unlift◦EJΓ⊢M :τ1×τ2K
EJΓ⊢r :RealK , liftC◦const◦Υ(r)
EJΓ⊢rop:Real n →RealK , liftC◦const◦Υ(rop)
EJΓ⊢dist:DistτK , liftC◦const◦Υ(dist)
EJΓ⊢returnM :DistτK , hdet◦f,η◦fi where f =EJΓ⊢M :τK
EJΓ⊢x←M1 ; M2 :Distτ2K , hsamp◦hπ1◦f,π1◦curry(g)i ,
(π2◦f)≻♭ (π2◦g)i
where f =EJΓ⊢M1 :Distτ1K
where g =EJΓ,x:τ1 ⊢M2 :τ2K
Figure6 ThedenotationalsemanticsofλCD isgivenbyinductiononthetypingderiva-
tion (semantics of additional constructs are shaded). The structure of the semantics is
similartoonewhereweuseCPOs.Υisaglobalenvironmentusedtointerpretconstants.
Thefunctionπx projectsthevariablexfromtheenvironment.
Denotationfunctionandsampling Thedenotationoftermscorrespond-
ingtothePCFfragmentarestandard.Hence,wewillfocusontheconstructs
λ introduces. The denotation of a constant real r is a global environment
CD
lookup.
EJΓ ⊢ r :RealK , lift ◦const◦Υ(r)
C
By the well-formedness of the global environment, Υ(r) will have a real-
izer. Likewise, the denotation of a primitive function on reals rop is a global
environment lookup and corresponds to a representation of the code imple-
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 37
menting the function.
EJΓ⊢ rop : Realn → RealK , lift ◦const◦Υ(rop)
C
The well-formedness of the global environment Υ enforces these conditions.
Ournexttask is toexplain thedenotation of distributionconstructs in λ .
CD
As a reminder, the interpretation of types is a pair of a sampler and the
distribution that it realizes. As we will see shortly, the semantics of the
sampling component and the semantics of the distribution component do
not depend on one another (besides the fact that we want the distribution
to be realized by the sampler). Hence, we could have given two different
semantics and related them. Nevertheless, in this form, we will obtain that
the valuation is the pushforwardalong the sampler, and consequently, make
theconnectionbetweenwhatisgivenbyadistributionalsemanticsandwhat
was implemented in the sampling library. We walk through the distribution
constructs now.
The denotation of a constant primitive distribution dist is a global envi-
ronmentlookup.NotethattheinterpretationofDistτ isapairofasampler
and valuation so the lookup should also produce a pair.
EJΓ ⊢ dist : DistτK , lift ◦const◦Υ(dist)
C
The denotation of return M produces a pair of a sampler that ignores the
input bit-randomness and a point mass valuation centered at M.
EJΓ ⊢ returnM :DistτK , hdet◦f,η◦fi where f = EJΓ⊢ M :τK
The meaning of x ← M ; N also gives a sampler and a valuation.
EJΓ⊢ x ← M ; M :Dist τ K ,
1 2 2
hsamp◦hπ ◦f,π ◦curry(g)i,(π ◦f)≻ (π ◦g)i
1 1 2 ♭ 2
where f = EJΓ ⊢ M : Dist τ K and g = EJΓ,x : τ ⊢ M : τ K. Under
1 1 1 2 2
the sampling view, we use samp to compose the sampler obtained by π ◦f
1
with the function π ◦g. Under the valuation component, we reweigh π ◦g
1 2
accordingtothevaluation π ◦f usingmonadbind≻ fromP.Wecan check
2 ♭
that the valuation given by the semantics is indeed the pushforward along
the sampler.
Proposition 5.1 (Push). Let D and E be countably based topological pre-
domains (qcb spaces more generally).
0
(i) psh (det(d)) =η(d) for any d∈ D.
D
(ii) psh (samp(s)(f)) = psh (s) ≻ v 7→ psh (f(v)) for any s ∈ S(D) and
E D ♭ E
f :D ⇒ S(E).
38 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
In the case of bind (the second item), it is necessary that the split operation
used in samp (Section 4.2) produces an independent stream of bits.
Weendbycheckingthattheexpressiondenotationfunctioniswell-defined.
Proposition 5.2 (Well-defined). The expression denotation function EJ·K
is well-defined, i.e., EJΓ ⊢ M : τK : VJΓK ⇒ VJτK for any well-typed term
Γ ⊢M :τ and well-formed global environment Ψ ⊢ Υ.
Thestructureof the argument showingthat the expression denotation func-
tion is well-defined is similar to the argument for showing that the CPO se-
manticsofPCFiswell-defined.TheinterestingcasescorrespondtoreturnM
and x ← M ; M where we need to relate the sampling component with
1 2
the valuation it denotes, which is given by Proposition 5.1.
5.3 Reasoning About Programs
We now return to resolving some semantic issues that were raised when we
used the library to implement distributions. Throughout this section, we
overload EJΓ ⊢ M : Dist τK to mean π ◦ EJΓ ⊢ M : Dist τK so that it
2
just provides the distributional view. As shorthand, we write EJ·Kρ instead
of EJ·K(ρ) where the meta-variable ρ ranges over environments.
Reasoning about distributions We first show that the encoding of the
standard geometric distribution is correct. Let µ be an unbiased Bernoulli
B
distribution and µn correspond to n un-foldings of stdGeometric:
1 (1) v = t
U
EJstdGeometricKρ(U) = sup v 7→ dµ
n∈N Z ( w 7→ 1 U (w+1)dµn v = f! B
∞
1 R
= sup(1 (1) + 1 (w+1)µn({w}))
U U
2
n∈N
w=0
X
∞
1
=1 (1) + 1 (w+1)(supµn({w})).
U U
2
n∈N
w=0
X
By induction on n, we can show that µn is the measure
µn = {0} 7→ 0,{1} 7→ (1/2),...,{n} 7→ (1/2)n .
Hence, we can conclude that sup µn is a geometric distribution and that
n∈N
the encoding of stdGeometric is correct (for any environment ρ).
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 39
Primitive functions In our encoding of the standard normal distribution
via the Marsaglia polar transformation, we used < as if it had a return type
of Bool even though equality on reals is not computable. Indeed, the well-
formedness conditions imposed on the global environment would disallow <
atthecurrenttype.Toresolvethesemanticsof<,wecanthinkintermsofan
implementation. In particular, we can encode < as dovetailing computations
that semi-decides x < y (i.e., return () if x < y and diverge otherwise) and
semi-decides x > y (i.e., returns () if x > y and diverge otherwise)). On
the case of equality, which occurs with probability 0 in the Marsaglia polar
transform, the function diverges.
Partiality and divergence We investigate the semantics of divergence
more closely now. For convenience, we repeat the two expressions from Sec-
tion 3 that provided two differing notions of divergence below.
botSamp :: (CMetrizable a) => Samp (Approx a)
botSamp = botSamp
botSampBot :: (CMetrizable a) => Samp (Approx a)
botSampBot = mkSamp (\_ -> bot)
where bot = bot
In the former, we obtain the bottom valuation, which assigns 0 mass to
every open set. This corresponds to the sampling function u ∈ 2ω 7→ ⊥
and can be interpreted as failing to provide a sampler. In the latter, we
obtain the valuation that assigns 0 mass to every open set, except for the
set {⌊X⌋∪⊥} which is assigned mass 1. This corresponds to the sampling
function u ∈ 2ω 7→ ⌊⊥⌋ and can be interpreted as providing a sampling
function that fails to produce a sample.
As before, we can check that laziness works in the appropriate manner by
selectively ignoring the results of draws from the distributions above.
alwaysDiv :: Samp Real neverDiv :: Samp Real
alwaysDiv = do neverDiv = do
_ <- botSamp :: _ <- botSampBot ::
Samp Real Samp Real
stdUniform stdUniform
We can check that the denotation of the former is equivalent to that of
botSamp:
EJalwaysDivKρ(U) = (· 7→ µ (U)) dEJbotSampKρ
U
Z
= 0
whereµ isthestandarduniformdistribution.NotethatEJbotSampKρmaps
U
40 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
every open set to 0 so the integral is 0 as well. However, the denotation of
the latter is equivalent to that of stdUniform:
EJneverDivKρ(U) = (·7→ µ (U)) dEJbotSampBotKρ
U
Z
= sup { sdEJbotSampBotKρ|s ≤ ·7→ µ (U)}
U
ssimple
Z
= µ (U).
U
As a reminder, EJbotSampBotKρ(U) = 1 when U = VJRealK. Hence, the
integral takes its largest value on the simple function33 µ (U)1 (·).
U VJRealK
As a final example, consider the program below that uses a coin flip to
determine its diverging behavior.
maybeBot :: Samp Bool
maybeBot = do
b <- stdBernoulli
if b then return bot else stdBernoulli
Intuitively, this distribution returns a sampler that always generates diverg-
ing samples with probability 1/2 and returns an unbiased Bernoulli dis-
tribution with probability 1/2. If we changed return bot to botSamp as
below
maybeBot’ :: Samp Bool
maybeBot’ = do
b <- stdBernoulli
if b then bot else stdBernoulli
then the semantics would change to a distribution that returns a diverging
sampler with probability 1/2 and an unbiased Bernoulli distribution with
probability 1/2.
Independence and commutativity In Section 3.2, we saw that we could
not argue that two distributions that commuted the order in which we sam-
pled independent normal distributions were equivalent. As a reminder, the
issue was that commuting the order of sampling meant that the underly-
ing random bit-stream was consumed in a different order. Consequently, the
values produced by the two terms may be different. However, as the seman-
tics we just saw relates the sampling view with the distributional view by
construction, we can easily see that these two terms will be distributionally
equivalent by Fubini.
33 As areminder,asimplefunction inour context isalinearcombination ofindicator functions
onopensets.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 41
nonComp :: Samp (Nat, Real)
nonComp = do
n <- geometric (1/2)
c <- bernoulli (1/3)
u <- uniform 0 1
v <- uniform 0 1
x <- return (mkApprox
(\k -> select u v c k (tmHaltsIn n)))
return (n, x)
where select u v c k m
| m > k = nthApprox v k
| m == k = if c then 1 else 0
| m < k = nthApprox u (k - m - 1)
Figure7 AHaskellencodingofacounter-examplegivenbyAckermanetal.(2011)that
showsthatconditioningisnotalwayscomputable. ThefunctiontmHaltsIn inthecode
outputsthenumberofstepsthen-thTuringmachinehaltsinor∞(fordiverges)ifthe
n-th Turing machine does not halt. The idea is that an algorithm that could compute
thisconditionaldistributionwouldimplyadecisionprocedurefortheHaltingproblem.
6 Bayesian Inference
What are the implications of taking a computable viewpoint for Bayesian
inference? In this section, we discuss the implications of taking a com-
putableviewpointforBayesian inference.Perhapssurprisingly,onecanshow
thatconditioningisnotcomputableingeneral.Nevertheless,conditioningin
practical settings does not run into these pathologies. It will be important
for probabilistic programming languages to support conditioning in these
cases. Note that these results say nothing about the efficiency of inference.
In practice, we will still need approximate inference algorithms to compute
conditional distributions.
6.1 Conditioning is not Computable
Figure 7 gives an encoding in λ of an example by Ackerman et al. (2011)
CD
that shows that conditioning is not always computable. Similar to other
resultsincomputabilitytheory,theexampledemonstratesthatanalgorithm
computingtheconditionaldistributionwouldalsosolvetheHaltingproblem.
The function tmHaltsIn accepts a natural n specifying the n-th Turing
machine and outputs the number of steps the n-th Turing machine halts
in or ∞ (for diverges) if the n-the Turing machine does not halt. Upon
inspection, we see the function nthApprox produces the binary expansion
(as a dyadic rational) of a real, using tmHaltsIn to select different bits of
42 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
module CondLib (BndDens, obsDens) where
import ApproxLib
import CompDistLib
import RealLib
newtype BndDens a b =
BndDens { getBndDens :: (Approx a -> Approx b ->
Real, Rat) }
-- Requires bounded and computable density
obsDens :: forall u v y.
(CMetrizable u, CMetrizable v, CMetrizable y) =>
Samp (Approx (u, v)) -> BndDens u y -> Approx y ->
Samp (Approx (u, v))
-- Extend with more conditioning operators below ...
Figure8 Aninterfaceforconditioning(moduleCondLib).ThefunctionobsDensenables
conditioning on continuous-valued data when a bounded and computable conditional
densityisavailable.
the binary expansion of u or v, or the bit c depending on whether the n-th
Turing machine halts within k steps or not.
ConsidercomputingtheconditionaldistributionP(N | X),wheretheran-
dom variable N corresponds to the program variable n and X to x. Thus,
computingtheconditionaldistributionP(N | X)correspondstodetermining
the value of the program variable n given the value of the program variable
x. We informally discuss why this distribution is not computable now. Ob-
serve that (1) the value of x depends on the value of n—whether the n-th
Turing machine halts within k steps or not for every k (hence whether the
n-th Turing machine halts or not)—and (2) the geometric distribution is
supported on N\{0} so we need to consider every Turing machine. Conse-
quently, we would require a decision procedure for the Halting problem in
order to compute the posterior distribution on n. Thus, nonComp encodes a
computable distribution P(N,X) whose conditional P(N | X) is not com-
putable.We refer thereader to the full proof (see Ackerman et al., 2011)for
more details.
6.2 Conditioning is Computable
Now, we add conditioning as a library to λ (Figure 8). λ provides only
CD CD
a restricted conditioning operation obsDens, which requires a conditional
density. We will see that the computability of obsDens corresponds to an
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 43
effective version of Bayes’ rule. We have given only one conditioning prim-
itive here, but it is possible to identify other situations where conditioning
is computable and add those to the conditioning library. For example, con-
ditioning on positive probability events is computable (see Galatolo et al.,
2010, Prop. 3.1.2).
The library provides the conditioning operation obsDens, which enables
us to condition on continuous-valued data when a boundedand computable
conditional density is available.
Proposition 6.1. (Ackerman et al., 2011, Cor. 8.8). Let U be a U-valued
random variable, V be a V-valued random variable, and Y be Y-valued
random variable, where Y is independent of V given U. Let U, V, and
Y be computable. Moreover, let pY|U(y | u) be a conditional density of Y
given U that is bounded and computable. Then the conditional distribution
P[(U,V) |Y] is computable.
The bounded and computable conditional density enables the following
integral to be computed, which is in essence Bayes’ rule. A version of the
conditional distribution P((U,V)| Y) is
κ (U,V)|Y(y,B) = B
pY|U(y |u)dµ (U,V)
R pY|U(y | u)dµ (U,V)
where B is a Borel set in the space aRssociated with U ×V and µ (U,V) is the
joint distribution of U and V.34
Another interpretation of the restricted situation is that our observations
have been corrupted by independent smooth noise (Ackerman et al., 2011,
Cor. 8.9). To see this, consider the following generative model:
(U,V) ∼ µ (U,V)
N ∼ µ
noise
Y = U +N
where µ
noise
has density pN(·). The random variable U can be interpreted
as the ideal model of how the data was generated and the random variable
V can be interpreted as the model parameters. The random variable Y can
then be interpreted as the data we observe that is smoothed by the noise
N so that pY|U(y | u) = pN(y −u). Notice that the model (U,V) is not
required to have a density and can be an arbitrary computable distribution.
The idea is that we condition on Y (i.e., the smoothed data) as opposed to
34 Asareminder,pY|(U,V) (y|u,v)=pY|U(y|u)duetotheconditionalindependenceofY and
V given U. Hence, the conditional density pY|U(y |u) inthe integral written moreprecisely
is(u,v)7→pY|U(y|u).
44 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
U (i.e., the ideal data) when we compute the posterior distribution for the
modelparametersV.35 Indeed,probabilisticprogrammingsystemsproposed
by the machine learning community impose a similar restriction (e.g., see
Goodman et al., 2008; Wood et al., 2014).
Now, we describe obsDens, starting with its type signature. Let the type
BndDensτ σ represent a bounded computable density:
newtype BndDens a b =
BndDens { getBndDens :: (Approx a -> Approx b ->
Real, Rat) }
Conditioning thus takes a samplable distribution, a bounded computable
densitydescribinghowobservationshavebeencorrupted,andreturnsasam-
plable distribution representing the conditional. In the context of Bayesian
inference,itdoesnotmakesensetoconditiondistributionssuchasmaybeBot
that diverge with positive probability. Hence, we do not give semantics to
conditioning on those distributions.
The implementation of obsDens is in essence a λ program that imple-
CD
ments the proof that conditioning is computable in this restricted setting.
This is possible because results in computability theory have computable
realizers.36
obsDens :: forall u v y.
(CMetrizable u, CMetrizable v, CMetrizable y) =>
Samp (Approx (u, v)) -> BndDens u y -> Approx y ->
Samp (Approx (u, v))
obsDens dist (BndDens (dens, bnd)) d =
let f :: Approx (u, v) -> Real = \x -> dens (
approxFst x) d
mu :: Prob (u, v) = sampToComp dist
nu :: Prob (u, v) = \bs ->
let num = integrateBndDom mu f bnd bs
denom = integrateBnd mu f bnd
in map fst (cauchyToLU (num / denom))
in
compToSamp nu
35 As an illustrative example, consider the following situation where we hope to model how a
scene in an image is constructed so we can identify objects in the image (see Kulkarnietal.,
2015, for a probabilistic programming language designed for scene perception). The model
parameters V contain all the information describing the objects in the scene, including their
optical properties and their positions. The resulting image U is then rendered by a graphics
engine. The caveat is that the graphics engine uses an enumeration of the Halting set to add
artifacts to the image so it is pathological. (Thus, this distribution is a version of nonComp.)
InsteadofattemptingtocomputetheposteriordistributionP(U |V),whichisnotcomputable,
we smooth out the rendered image U with some noise given by pY|U(y |u). In other words,
we apply some filtering to the image U so we obtain an image Y freeof artifacts introduced
by the pathological graphics engine. The posterior P((U,V)|V) is then computable. In this
example,theposteriorwouldgivethepositionsandopticalpropertiesofobjectsgivenanimage
soitcouldbeusedincomputer visionapplications.
36 Thatis,weimplementtheType-2machinecodeasaHaskellprogram.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 45
Theparameterdistcorrespondstothejointdistributionofthemodel(both
model parameters and likelihood), dens corresponds to a bounded condi-
tional density describing how observation of data has been corrupted by
independent noise, and d is the observed data. Next, we informally describe
the undefined functions in the sketch. The function approxFst projects
out the first component of a product of approximations. The functions
sampToCompand compToSampwitness the computable isomorphism between
samplableand computable distributions.37 Thefunctions integrateBndDom
andintegrateBndcompute an integral (see Hoyrup and Rojas,2009, Prop.
4.3.1), and correspond to an effective Lebesgue integral. cauchyToLU con-
vertsaCauchydescriptionofacomputablerealintoanenumerationoflower
and upper bounds.
Because obsDens works with conditional densities, we do not need to
worry about the Borel paradox. The Borel paradox shows that we can ob-
taindifferentconditionaldistributionswhenconditioningonprobabilityzero
events(e.g.,seeRao and Swift,2006).Toillustratethis,supposethatXand
Y are two independent random variables with standard normal distribu-
tions. We can ask a (classic) question: “What is the conditional distribution
of Y given that X = Y?”
In statistics, the appropriate response is to notice that the question as
posedisill-formed—onecannotconditiononameasurezeroevent.Thewell-
posed formulation is to definean auxiliary random variable Z and condition
on a constant. For instance, Z = X−Y conditioned on Z = 0, Z = Y/X
conditioned on Z = 1 , and Z = I conditioned on Z = 1. Remarkably,
Y=X
all three versions lead to different answers (Proschan and Presnell, 1998).
A probabilistic programming language that does not provide a notion of
random variable such as λ will need an alternative method of addressing
CD
this issue. Type-2 computability provides a straight-forward answer—it is
not possible to create a boolean value that distinguishes two probability
zero events in λ . For instance, the operator == implementing equality on
CD
reals returns false if two reals are provably not-equal and diverges otherwise
because equality is not decidable.
7 Summary and Further Directions
We hope to have shown that we do not need to sacrifice traditional notions
of computation when modeling reals and continuous distributions by keep-
37 The computable isomorphism relies on the distributions being full-measure. The algorithm is
undefined otherwise.
46 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
ing their representations in mind. The simple observation is that we can
“program” them in a general-purpose programming language. With this in
mind,wecan nowask abasicquestion:“What doesitmeanforaprobabilis-
tic programming language to be Turing-complete?” From the perspective of
Type-2 computability, one answer is that such a language can express all
Type-2 computable distributions, analogous to how a Turing-complete lan-
guage can express all computable functions. Indeed, this resolution is some-
what tautological!
This answer raises another interesting question related to full-abstraction
anduniversality38 ofprobabilisticprograms.InthestandardsettingofPCF,
one approach to the full-abstraction problem is to add parallel or por to the
language so that the operational behavior coincides with the denotational
semantics. Additionally adding a searching operator exists means that all
computable functions will be definable. One may wonder, if an analogous
result holds for probabilistic programs. In particular, a universality result
would crystallize the thought that Turing-complete probabilistic program-
ming languages express Type-2 computable distributions.
As wearenow back onfamiliar groundswithregards tocomputability, we
canturnourattention tothedesign ofprobabilisticprogramminglanguages.
The design of such languages will demand more from a semantics of prob-
abilistic programs. For example, for the purposes of automating Bayesian
inference, it is crucial that the inference procedure be efficient (and not
simply computable). Onedirection is to find compilation strategies that can
efficiently realize Type-2computabledistributionsorapproximate them(for
some notion of approximation) usingfloating point numbers.Another direc-
tion is to consider alternative language designs (in addition to PCF with a
probability monad) and the corresponding structures that we will need to
model these languages.
Acknowledgments We thank our anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments and feedback.
38 Aprogramminglanguageisuniversalifallcomputableelementsinthedomainofinterpretation
aredefinable.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 47
Bibliography
Abramsky, Samson, and Jung, Achim. 1994. Domain Theory. Pages 1–168
of: Abramsky, Samson, Gabbay, Dov M, and Maibaum, T S E (eds),
Handbook ofLogic inComputerScience,vol.3.OxfordUniversityPress.
Ackerman, Nathanael Leedom, Freer, Cameron E, and Roy, Daniel M. 2011.
Noncomputable Conditional Distributions. Pages 107–116 of: Proceed-
ings of the 26th Annual Symposium on Logic in Computer Science.
IEEE.
Battenfeld, Ingo. 2004 (6). A Category of Topological Predomains. M.Phil.
thesis, TU Darmstadt.
Battenfeld,Ingo.2008. Topological Domain Theory. Ph.D.thesis,University
of Edinburgh.
Battenfeld, Ingo, Schro¨der, Matthias, and Simpson, Alex. 2006. Compactly
generated domain theory. Mathematical Structures in Computer Sci-
ence, 16(2), 141–161.
Battenfeld, Ingo, Schro¨der, Matthias, and Simpson, Alex. 2007. A Conve-
nient Category of Domains. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science, 172, 69–99.
Bauer, Andrej. 2000a. The Realizability Approach to Computable Analy-
sis and Topology. Ph.D. thesis, School of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Bauer, Andrej. 2000b (9). The Realizability Approach to Computable Anal-
ysis and Topology. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon University.
Bauer,Andrej.2005. Realizability as the connection between computable and
constructive mathematics.
Bauer,Andrej,andKavkler, Iztok. 2008. ImplementingRealNumbersWith
RZ. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 202, 365–384.
Birkedal, Lars. 1999. Developing Theories of Types and Computability via
Realizability. Ph.D. thesis, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mel-
lon University.
Borgstro¨m, Johannes, Gordon, Andrew D, Greenberg, Michael, Margetson,
James,andVanGael,Jurgen.2011. MeasureTransformerSemanticsfor
Bayesian Machine Learning. Pages 77–96 of: Programming Languages
and Systems. Springer.
Crubill´e, Rapha¨elle. 2018. Probabilistic Stable Functions on Discrete Cones
are Power Series. Pages 275–284 of: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science. ACM.
Dal Lago, Ugo, and Zorzi, Margherita. 2012. Probabilistic operational se-
mantics for the lambda calculus. RAIRO-Theoretical Informatics and
Applications, 46(3), 413–450.
Danos,Vincent,andEhrhard,Thomas.2011. Probabilisticcoherencespaces
48 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
as a model of higher-order probabilistic computation. Information and
Computation, 209(6), 966–991.
Durrett, Rick. 2010. Probability: Theory and Examples. 4 edn. Cambridge
University Press.
Ehrhard,Thomas,Tasson,Christine,andPagani,Michele. 2014. Probabilis-
tic Coherence Spaces are Fully Abstract for Probabilistic PCF. Pages
309–320 of: ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 49. ACM.
Ehrhard,Thomas,Pagani,Michele,andTasson,Christine.2018. Measurable
Cones and Stable, Measurable Functions: A Model for Probabilistic
Higher-Order Programming. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages, 2(POPL), 59.
Escard´o,Mart´ınH¨otzel. 1996. PCFextendedwithrealnumbers. Theoretical
Computer Science, 162(1), 79–115.
Escard´o,Mart´ınH¨otzel.2004. Synthetictopology:ofdatatypesandclassical
spaces. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 87, 21–156.
Escard´o, Mart´ın H¨otzel, Lawson, Jimmie, and Simpson, Alex. 2004. Com-
paringCartesianclosedcategories of(core)compactlygeneratedspaces.
Topology and its Applications, 143(1), 105–145.
Freer, Cameron E, and Roy, Daniel M. 2010. Posterior distributions are
computable from predictive distributions. Pages 233–240 of: Proceed-
ings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. SAIS.
Galatolo, Stefano, Hoyrup, Mathieu, and Rojas, Crist´obal. 2010. Effective
symbolicdynamics,randompoints,statistical behavior,complexity and
entropy. Information and Computation, 208(1), 23–41.
Giry, Mich`ele. 1982. A categorical approach to probability theory. Pages
68–85 of: Categorical Aspects of Topology and Analysis. Springer.
Goodman,Noah,Mansinghka,Vikash,Roy,Daniel M,Bonawitz, Keith,and
Tenenbaum,JoshuaB.2008. Church:Alanguageforgenerativemodels.
Pages 220–229 of: Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence. AUAI.
Gunter, Carl A. 1992. Semantics of Programming Languages: Structures
and Techniques. Foundations of Computing. The MIT Press.
Heunen, Chris,Kammar, Ohad, Staton, Sam, and Yang, Hongseok. 2017. A
Convenient Category for Higher-Order Probability Theory. Pages 1–12
of: Logic in Computer Science (LICS), 2017 32nd Annual ACM/IEEE
Symposium on. IEEE.
Hoyrup, Mathieu, and Rojas, Crist´obal. 2009. Computability of probability
measures and Martin-Lo¨f randomness over metric spaces. Information
and Computation, 207(7), 830–847.
Huang, Daniel, and Morrisett, Greg. 2016. An Application of Computable
Distributions to the Semantics of Probabilistic Programming Lan-
guages. Pages 337–363 of: Programming Languages and Systems.
An Application of Computable Distributions ... 49
Huang, Daniel Eachern. 2017. On Programming Languages for Probabilistic
Modeling. Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University.
Jones, Claire. 1989 (8). Probabilistic Non-determinism. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh.
Kozen,Dexter. 1981. Semantics of Probabilistic Programs. Journal of Com-
puter and System Sciences, 22(3), 328–350.
Kulkarni, Tejas D, Kohli, Pushmeet, Tenenbaum, Joshua B, and Mans-
inghka, Vikash. 2015. Picture: A Probabilistic Programming Language
for Scene Perception. Pages 4390–4399 of: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE.
Lambov, Branimir. 2007. RealLib: An Efficient Implementation of Exact
Real Arithmetic. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 17(1),
81–98.
Lietz, Peter. 2004 (12). From Constructive Mathematics to Computable
Analysis via the Realizability Interpretation. Ph.D. thesis, TU Darm-
stadt.
Longley, John R. 1995 (10). Realizability Toposes and Language Semantics.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh.
Munkres, James R. 2000. Topology. 2 edn. Prentice Hall.
Panangaden, Prakash. 1999. The Category of Markov Kernels. Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 22, 171–187.
Park, Sungwoo, Pfenning, Frank, and Thrun, Sebastian. 2005. A Proba-
bilistic Language Based Upon Sampling Functions. Pages 171–182 of:
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Prin-
ciples of Programming Languages. ACM.
Peyton Jones, Simon, Reid, Alastair, Henderson, Fergus, Hoare, Tony, and
Marlow, Simon. 1999. A Semantics for Imprecise Exceptions. Pages
25–36 of: Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-
gramming Language Design and Implementation. ACM.
Proschan,MichaelA,andPresnell,Brett.1998. ExpecttheUnexpectedfrom
Conditional Expectation. The American Statistician, 52(3), 248–252.
Rao, Malempati M, and Swift, Randall J. 2006. Probability theory with ap-
plications. 2 edn. Mathematics and Its Applications, vol. 582. Springer.
Saheb-Djahromi, Nasser. 1978. Probabilistic LCF. Mathematical Founda-
tions of Computer Science, 64, 442–451.
Schro¨der, Matthias. 2007. Admissible Representations of Probability Mea-
sures. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 167, 61–78.
Sipser, Michael. 2012. Introduction to the Theory of Computation. 3 edn.
Cengage Learning.
Staton, Sam.2017. Commutative Semantics for Probabilistic Programming.
Pages 855–879 of: European Symposium on Programming. Springer.
50 Huang, Morrisett and Spitters
Streicher, Thomas. 2008. Realizability.
http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/~streicher/REAL/REAL.pdf.
Course Lecture Notes.
V´ak´ar,Matthijs,Kammar,Ohad,andStaton,Sam.2019. ADomainTheory
for Statistical Probabilistic Programming. Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, 3(POPL), 36.
Weihrauch, Klaus. 2000. Computable Analysis: An Introduction. 2000 edn.
Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. An EATCS Series. Springer.
Wood, Frank, van de Meent, Jan Willem, and Mansinghka, Vikash. 2014. A
new approach to probabilistic programming inference. Pages 2–46 of:
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Statistics. SAIS.
