An Integrated Approach for Energy Efficient Handover
and Key Distribution Protocol for Secure NC-enabled
Small Cells
Vipindev Adat Vasudevana,b,∗, Muhammad Tayyabc, George P. Koudouridisd,
Xavier Gelabertd, Ilias Politisa,e
aWireless Communications Laboratory, University of Patras, Greece
bUniversidade de Vigo, Vigo, Spain
cDepartment of Communications and Networking, School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto
University, Espoo, Finland
dHuawei Technologies Sweden AB, Kista, Sweden
eSystems Security Laboratory, University of Piraeus, Greece
Abstract
Futurewirelessnetworksmustservedensemobilenetworkswithhighdatarates,
keeping energy requirements to a possible minimum. The small cell-based net-
workarchitectureanddevice-to-device(D2D)communicationarealreadybeing
considered part of 5G networks and beyond. In such environments, network
coding (NC) can be employed to achieve both higher throughput and energy
efficiency. However, NC-enabled systems need to address security challenges
specific to NC, such as pollution attacks. All integrity schemes against pol-
lution attacks generally require proper key distribution and management to
ensure security in a mobile environment. Additionally, the mobility require-
ments in small cell environments are more challenging and demanding in terms
of signaling overhead. This paper proposes a blockchain-assisted key distribu-
tion protocol tailored for MAC-based integrity schemes, which combined with
an uplink reference signal (UL RS) handover mechanism, enables energy ef-
ficient secure NC. The performance analysis of the protocol during handover
scenarios indicates its suitability for ensuring high level of security against pol-
lution attacks in dense small cell environments with multiple adversaries being
∗Correspondingauthor: VipindevAdatVasudevan(vipindev@ece.upatras.gr)
Preprint submitted to Computer Networks, Elsevier May 19, 2022
2202
yaM
71
]IN.sc[
1v14680.5022:viXra
present. Furthermore, the proposed scheme achieves lower bandwidth and sig-
naling overhead during handover compared to legacy schemes and the signaling
cost reduces significantly as the communication progresses, thus enhancing the
network’s cumulative energy efficiency.
Keywords: Network Coding, Key management, Handover, 5G and Small cells
1. Introduction
Theexponentialgrowthinthenumberofdigitaldevicesandthedatatraffic
generated by them has forced a major upgrade in communication technologies.
The cellular communication technology is changing in its entirety and the fifth-
generation (5G) of wireless technology being rolled out in experimental studies
shows the paradigm shift towards future networks. The 5G and beyond (B5G)
networksareexpectedtohavesignificantchangesintheunderlyingtechnologies
as well as in the system architecture [1, 2]. Focusing on providing a high data
rateforadensenetworkofmobileusers,smallcellultra-densification,byplacing
base stations (BSs) in close proximity, becomes one of the major structural
changes in future cellular networks. This reduces the power requirements of
BSs without compromising the quality of services by reducing the area and the
number of users to be served by a single BS. On the other hand, device-to-
device(D2D)communication[3]willsupplementtheparadigmshiftfromaBS-
centric approach to a more user-centric approach into practice. The operation
of B5G networks will also be supported by different novel technologies such
as, e.g., blockchain, artificial intelligence, network coding, and software-defined
networks which may not be the subject of standardization but still play pivotal
roles for the network operation automation and the supported applications in
the 5G era. In particular, in a cooperative environment of small cells and D2D-
enabled devices, network coding (NC) provides exciting prospects to achieve
high network throughput and efficient bandwidth usage. Furthermore, NC’s
underlying principle, allowing the intermediate nodes in a hop-by-hop network
to code the packets on the fly, will also enhance the reliability in a wireless
2
environment with low energy requirements [4]. Despite NC-enabled small cells
can match multiple use cases in the B5G environment [5], it also suffers from
new security challenges. Specifically in this work, we draw our attention to
the pollution attacks in an NC environment in combination with the increased
handover (HO) signaling rates due to small cell deployments. These are briefly
described in the following paragraphs.
In essence, NC enables the intermediate nodes1 in the network to code the
packetstheyreceiveandsendthecodedpackets(thesepacketsintransitionare
referred as in-transit packets) to the outgoing links. This unique property of
NCalsointroducesasecurityvulnerabilityinthesystem. Anadversarycanex-
ploit this ability to inject a corrupted packet into the packet flow. This kind of
attack, where an adversary node injects a corrupted packet, therefore polluting
the communication in a network, is called a pollution attack in NC scenarios.
If a polluted packet is introduced to the network and not detected, all subse-
quently coded packets containing the polluted packet will also be corrupted.
Unsurprisingly,thiscontagiouspropertyofpollutionattacksmakesitoneofthe
majorchallengesinNCimplementations. Sincethein-transitpacketsarecoded
by participating nodes, generic integrity schemes, such as hashes, signatures, or
messageauthenticationcodes,willnotbesufficienttopreventpollutionattacks.
Tothisend,homomorphicMessageAuthenticationCode(MAC)-basedintegrity
schemes are used to enable secure NC [6]. However, the MAC-based integrity
schemesrequiresomesymmetrickeystobesharedbetweenthesourcenodeand
receivingnodes. Mostoftheintegrityschemessuggesthavingapre-distribution
of these keys and based on specific key distribution models such as c-cover free
system [7]. These key distribution schemes play a crucial role in protecting the
integrity scheme from colluding adversaries. Essentially, traditional key distri-
bution schemes are used to distribute a set of keys in such a way that no node
1The term node in the context of NC has a wide meaning and could describe any com-
municationnodeinacommunicationsystem,includingsource,destination,andintermediate
nodes. Whennecessary,afurtherdistinctionwillbemadeinthearticle.
3
willhaveallthesetofkeysthesourcenodehasusedtocreatethetags. However,
achieving such key distributions with constraints depending on the number of
participants in the network can be troublesome in a dense network of mobile
nodes. Furthermore,inthecaseofamobilenetwork,theneighborhoodofnodes
canbevolatilemakingitevenmoredifficulttoachievepractically. Thusmoving
towards the future networks, the idea of key distribution for secure NC-enabled
environments requires significant advancements.
There are a few fundamental requirements on the key distribution schemes
forsecureNCapplicationscomparedtotraditionalkeymanagementanddistri-
bution protocols. These keys are essentially used to ensure the integrity of the
in-transitpacketsratherthanauthenticatingthenodesinthenetwork. Further,
they should also be able to ensure integrity check over RLNC coded packets,
thus requiring homomorphic properties for the integrity scheme. Even though
the MAC-based integrity schemes require symmetric keys to be shared in the
network,thesearenotpairwisekeysasinaprivatekeycryptosystem. Thesame
set of keys needs to be shared with multiple participants, making it a special
caseofsymmetrickeydistributionforNCapplications. Insuchanarrangement,
thesecretkeyisnotuniqueforaparticularnode,butmultipleparticipantsmay
use the keys from the same set for creating their tags while acting as the source
node. Thusthekeyscannotbeusedtodifferentiatetheparticipantsinthepro-
posedenvironments. Further,thekeydistributiondoesnothappenpairwise,so
when a new node is entering the network, there is no need to be given a new
unique key, but be provided access to the existing key set in the network. This
is also a special case of the proposed key distribution for secure NC-enabled
environments which also has implications in the handover mechanism which
involves the movement of nodes.
The major shortcomings of the existing key distribution schemes in secure
NC applications are the lack of scalability and suitability to a mobile envi-
ronment. The two major variants of the key distribution for the MAC-based
integrity scheme were present in [8] and [9]; both based on approaches men-
tioned in [7]. However, both these approaches have a limit on the number of
4
adversariesthatcanbesuccessfullypreventedwhichwilldependonthenumber
ofkeysinthenetwork. Thiswillalsoimpactthescalabilityofthenetworksince
theprobabilityofcolludingattackerswillincreasewiththeincreaseinthenum-
berofnodesandalargernumberofkeyswillberequiredtoaccommodatemore
nodes. Furthermore, a pre-distributed key management scheme is not ideal for
a mobile network. In addition to the aforementioned security challenges, small
cells introduce additional mobility challenges in terms of an increased number
of HOs and, consequently, HO signaling, owing to decreased cell sizes. In this
respect, with regards to HO signaling, proper key sharing during HOs is funda-
mental for the participating nodes to ensure security and harness the benefits
ofNCproperties. Astheparticipantsmaymovefromonesmallcelltoanother,
itmayrequirenewkeys. Updatinganincomingparticipantwiththesetofkeys
usedinthetargetcellmaybeperformedaspartofthehandoverprocedure. To
facilitate this, the existing schemes may have very high overheads to share the
required keys. As a result, the mobility requirements become more demand-
ing both in terms of reducing HO failures and HO-related signaling, altogether
calling for a re-design of current HO procedures.
In this paper, we jointly address the aforementioned challenges by propos-
ing a blockchain-enhanced key distribution scheme to ensure the integrity of
packetsinNC-enabledsmallcellenvironments. Theaimistoaddresstheprob-
lem of key sharing and propose a solution using a blockchain-like distributed
ledger that satisfies the requirements for low latency and minimum process-
ing capacity [10]. This scheme is further aided by an uplink reference signal
(UL RS) based HO scheme [11] to address the problem of high HO signaling
overhead in small cell deployments which encompasses a higher number of key
exchanges. We further analyze the key management overheads during HOs
to ensure secure NC in the small cell environment. We combine the UL RS
basedHO(UL-HO)schemeandtheblockchain-basedkeysharingapproachand
propose a blockchain-based security and HO controller (BSH controller) to en-
sure a smooth and secure HO process for NC-enabled mobile small cells. The
blockchain-based key management reduces the number of signal exchanges dur-
5
ingHOscomparedtotraditionalapproaches,andtheULRSbasedHOschemes
further assist towards reducing the latency incurred by the blockchain verifica-
tion. This proposed approach is studied and compared with other traditional
schemes in terms of signaling overheads and different security parameters. The
extensiveanalysisanddiscussionsontheproposedapproachshowthefollowing
novel contributions:
• A distributed key management scheme suitable for highly mobile secure
network coding enabled environment.
• The proposed architecture ensures high security against pollution attacks
in dense small cell environments with low bandwidth overhead even if
multiple adversaries are present.
• Energyefficienthandoverwithlowsignalingoverheadcomparedtolegacy
schemes.
• Signallingcostreducessignificantlyasthecommunicationprogresses,thus
enhancing the network’s cumulative energy efficiency.
The remaining sections in the paper are arranged as follows. A literature
review of different MAC-based integrity schemes for secure NC with a focus on
key management protocols and a review of legacy HO schemes are presented in
section 2. Section 3 describes the system model of the NC-enabled small cells
and how the BSH controller helps to secure HOs. The simulation scenarios and
analysisoftheproposedapproachintermsofbandwidthandsignalingoverhead,
as well as different security parameters, are presented in section 4 followed by
section 5, which concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
This section discusses preliminary details and state of the art related to
securenetworkcodingandmobilitychallengesinthe5Gandsmallcellenviron-
ment.
6
2.1. Network Coding Preliminaries
The idea of NC was introduced as a max-flow min-cut theorem for network
information flow in a multicast scenario by Ahlsewede et al. [12], noting that
coding at intermediate nodes offered substantial benefits compared to simple
routing or forwarding in terms of bandwidth efficiency. Subsequently, a similar
study extending the idea of NC to directed acyclic graphs to find the optimal
max-flowmin-cutboundwaspresentedin[13]. Itwasproposedthereinthatthe
optimumcanbeachievedwhenlinearcodingisappliedtothemulticastscenario
using coefficients from a finite field. Thereafter, it was proposed that randomly
chosen coefficients could be used to perform linear NC and still decode packets
efficiently,usingmatrixtheory,whenasufficientnumberoflinearlyindependent
coded packets was received [14, 15]. As a result, random linear network coding
(RLNC)pavedthewayforusingNCindynamicandvolatileenvironmentssuch
as wireless networks, with [16, 4] identifying some prospects of using RLNC in
B5G.Theinterestedreaderisreferredtoadetailedstudyofdifferentdimensions
of NC theory and principles presented in [17].
2.2. Secure Network Coding-Enabled Small Cells
Pollution attacks are considered as one of the most dreadful attacks in NC-
enabled environments. They are difficult to mitigate and can spread across the
networkreducingthethroughputsignificantly. Genericintegrityschemesfailto
ensureintegrityinNC-enabledenvironmentssincethepacketsarerecodeddur-
ing transmission [18]. However, homomorphic MACs can be successfully used
to ensure the integrity of coded packets. Such MACs that provide homomor-
phic properties over RLNC operations are first proposed in [6]. In MAC-based
integrity schemes, message authentication codes are created over the packet by
the source node and attached as tags to the packet. These tags can be verified
by the receiving nodes if they possess the keys used to create the tags. If a ma-
licious user gets the key, it can pollute the packet and create a valid tag so that
the polluted packet will not be detected and thus making the integrity scheme
void. This issue has been addressed in different integrity schemes by different
7
keydistributionmodels. AnotherchallengeintheMAC-basedintegrityschemes
isthetagpollutionattack. Intagpollutionattacks, themalicioususerwillpol-
lute tags of a genuine packet which will result in the discarding of that packet
by a benign receiver. This will also reduce the throughput of the network. In
this subsection, we review three prominent MAC-based integrity schemes that
tacklebothdatapollutionandtagpollutionattacksandprovideanoverviewof
the key distribution schemes they employ.
MacSig[8]wasoneoftheinitialintegrityschemeswhichaddressedtheissue
of both data pollution and tag pollution attack. MacSig uses homomorphic
MACs to ensure data integrity and a homomorphic signature to protect from
the tag pollution attacks. A double random key distribution scheme is used in
MacSig to ensure safe key distribution. In practice, more than one tag will be
used to achieve enhanced security using a set of keys. An attacker will have
to acquire all these keys to bypass the integrity check. In double random key
distribution, every participating node is initially provided with a set of random
keys as in [7]. Then, while initiating the transmission, the source chooses l
random keys from the key set it holds and uses these keys for tag creation.
Nodes that have at least one of these l keys can verify the integrity of the
packets during the transmission. If a receiving node does not have any of the
keys used to create the tags, it will not be able to verify the integrity of the
packets. However, even if the receiving node holds most keys, there is a slight
chance of a polluted packet to escape the integrity check. This implies that the
probability of a polluted packet passing the integrity check at a receiving node
with l(cid:48) matching keys depends on both the number of matching keys and the
field size of the NC operations (q), and is equal to 1/ql(cid:48).
Another integrity scheme, which addresses both data pollution and tag pol-
lutionattacksusingadifferentkeydistributionandreferredtoashomomorphic
MAC (HMAC) scheme, is proposed in [9]. Therein, Esfahani et al. employed a
key distribution model based on c-cover free set systems [7]. In this proposed
scheme they use MACs to ensure data integrity and a so-called D-MAC with a
signature to protect against tag pollution attack. The keys are distributed in a
8
randomfashionaspertheprinciplesofc-coverfreesetsystems. InHMAC,two
sets of keys are shared with the source node and different subsets of them are
shared with the remaining nodes. To ensure the key distribution is c collision-
resistant, the number of keys at the source node should be at least equal to
c times the number of keys each participating node has. More precisely, in
HMAC, every participating node, other than the source node, will have only
one key from the key set of the source. This limits the integrity check at each
node to a single tag verification which allows a polluted packet to pass through
the integrity check with a probability of 1/q. There are also recent schemes
in the literature such as [19, 20] which use the same cover free set systems for
key distribution. However, these schemes also require an additional swapping
vector to be secretly shared between the participating nodes for the purpose of
enablingnull-spacebasedintegrityschemesproposedintheseworks. Thisisan
addedoverheadoverthec-coverfreekeydistribution. Anothertypeofintegrity
scheme was presented by Lawrence et al. in [21, 22]. However, this scheme
is also having key distribution based on cover free systems, with an additional
arrangement to reduce the bandwidth by carefully choosing the first two keys.
This is additional to the conditions of cover free systems. This also means that
the recent schemes have more or equivalent complexity to the c-cover free sys-
tem described in [8]. Thus, even though there are recent schemes using the key
distributionscheme,wecompareourapproachwiththebasicandmostefficient
key distribution process following the c-cover free system presented in [8].
Finally, a blockchain-based integrity scheme is proposed for next-generation
small cells in [23]. This integrity scheme uses homomorphic MACs to ensure
data integrity and shares these MACs with other participating nodes through
a blockchain overlay of small cells. This integrity scheme allows all the partic-
ipating nodes to have the complete set of keys used by the source nodes and
verification of all the tags attached to the packets. This ensures that if L keys
areusedtocreatethetags, everyreceivingnodecanverifyalltheLtags, limit-
ing the probability of a polluted packet passing through a benign node to 1/qL.
TheblockchaincanalsobeusedtosharethekeysrequiredforMACverification.
9
To this end, [10] studies how the blockchain-based key sharing scheme helps to
extendtheintegrityschemetoanetworkofmultipleNC-enabledsmallcellsand
support inter-cell mobility for users.
2.3. Key Management Schemes for NC-Enabled Small Cells
As discussed in the introduction, secure NC-enabled small cells use HMAC
based integrity schemes to prevent pollution attacks which require symmetric
keystobedistributedamongtheparticipatingnodes. Increasingthecomplexity
of the required key management scheme, a source node will have to share a
secret key with different nodes in the network to ensure the integrity checks are
possible with intermediate and destination nodes. In other words, even though
the keys are symmetric, they are not pairwise, rather the keys used by a source
node should be available to the nodes that are involved in the information flow
startedbythesourcenode. ThisrequirementofHMAC-basedintegrityschemes
is different from the general authentication schemes and the key management
scheme also has some additional requirements as described in the introduction.
The proposed approach should be scalable and support a highly dense mobile
environment spread across a large geographical area and be suitable for the
small cell scenario in 5G and beyond networks [24, 25, 26, 27]. Towards this
end,wearelookingatdifferentdecentralizedintegrityschemestodistributethe
secret keys used for HMAC-based integrity schemes to the participating nodes.
The key distribution schemes can be broadly classified into centralized, par-
tially distributed, and fully distributed approaches [28]. The centralized ap-
proachlargelydependsontheavailabilityofacentraltrustedthirdparty(TTP)
for generating the keys, distributing them to the participants, and managing
the key life cycle. However, the availability of such a TTP over a large network
throughout its operation has been a point of concern from the time of mobile
adhocnetworks. Thishasledtotheideaofdecentralizedschemestodistribute
thekeys. Apartiallydistributedschemedistributesthedutyofkeydistribution
to a proper subset of network nodes and these nodes will manage the key life
cycle for the remaining participants. For example, in a small cell environment,
10
the small cells may be provided with the additional responsibility of key man-
agement, ensuring these nodes can be trusted in the system. Fully distributed
schemes also exist in the literature where the trust is evenly distributed across
all the participating nodes. This work focuses on a partially distributed ap-
proach of symmetric key sharing where the small cells are entrusted with the
key distribution.
de Ree et al. [28] discuss relevant key management schemes on the back-
drop of 5G ad beyond networks and discuss the requirements and favorable
characteristics of key management schemes for a network of mobile small cells.
The symmetric key management schemes can be broadly divided into key pre-
distribution, key distribution, and key agreement. The key agreement schemes
require a set of participating nodes to interact among themselves to establish
a shared symmetric key. This type of schemes does not require any centralized
trustedthirdpartytomanagethekeysbuttheyarealsonotverystableagainst
network topological changes. Furthermore, it will take more time and message
exchanges to reach an agreement on the shared secret which can increase the
communication and latency overheads in key management. Such schemes also
relyonspecificsecureroutinginfrastructuretoavoidman-in-the-middleattacks
while key agreement.
Bothkeypre-distributionanddistributionclassesareorganizedbyatrusted
thirdpartycalledtheKeyDistributionCenter(KDC).Inthefirstsetofschemes
such as [29, 30, 31, 32], the pairwise keys are distributed by the KDC in the
network initialization phase and the KDC will be offline afterward. This re-
stricts new nodes entering the network after the initialization phase from get-
ting proper keys to communicate with existing nodes in the network. Most
of the previous integrity schemes [8, 9] addressing pollution attacks used key
pre-distribution approaches [7] since they focused on static networks. However,
thepre-distributionmodelsareresilientagainstdynamicnetworkenvironments
such as mobile networks making them not the ideal choice for future wireless
networks.
Theclassofkeydistributionschemesdiffersfromthepre-distributionschemes
11
mainly on the availability of the KDC during the network lifetime. In key dis-
tribution schemes, the KDC will be online during network deployment and any
node can interact with the KDC to obtain a temporary key to communicate
with another node in the network. Thus each node will only store a long-
lasting symmetric key to interact with the KDC and obtain the temporary key
on-demand for interacting with other nodes in the network. Several key dis-
tribution approaches designed for mobile ad-hoc networks [33, 34, 35] employ
a centralized KDC which creates the risk of a single point of failure as well as
restricts the capacity to support a dense mobile network. In a dense mobile
network,theavailabilityofthecentralizedKDCmaybelimitedduetodifferent
factors such as communication range, congestion, unknown network topology,
increased mobility etc.
Considering the above aspects, this paper proposes a distributed key man-
agementprotocolforsecureNC-enabledenvironments. Theideaofusingdecen-
tralized key management schemes to suit the requirements of mobile networks
in the 5G and beyond era has got significant research attractions in the recent
years [24, 25, 26, 27]. The proposed key distribution protocol employs the dis-
tributed ledger hosted by the BSH controllers to efficiently distribute the keys
in the dynamic environment. A detailed description of the scheme is presented
in the following section 3. It is to be noted that the specific key management
anddistributionprotocolsthatarediscussedinthescopeofthispaperareused
for efficient integrity schemes to prevent pollution attacks and not necessarily
be used for authentication of the participating devices. The key management
for authentication of devices in such environments may be performed with any
of the previously discussed approaches in the literature.
2.4. UL Handover Scheme For Small Cells
As discussed in previous subsections, the security of the NC-enabled small
cells depends on the integrity schemes and the key distribution. In a mobile
environment, the key distribution should also be a part of the HO protocol
and the users requesting a HO should also be provided with the required keys
12
to ensure the integrity of packets it receives. In this setup, the adoption of
theUL-HOschemeforsmallcellenvironmentsbringssubstantialimprovements
with respect to the legacy DL RS based HO scheme as noted, e.g., in [11, 36].
Therein, UL RSs are transmitted by the User Equipments2 (UEs) which are
then received at the serving as well as the nearby BSs for posterior measure-
mentandprocessing. Acentralnetworkcontrollercollectsandfurtherprocesses
thesemeasurementsandtriggersaHOifdeemednecessary,eliminatingthesub-
sequent measurement reporting phase of the legacy HO schemes. Noteworthy,
as noted in [11], the UL-HO scheme reduces the HO rate due to a reduction in
HO failures and unnecessary HOs (i.e. ping-pongs). As a result, the number of
security key exchanges during HO also decreases.
In addition, research undergone in [11, 37, 38, 39] further shows that the
UL-HO scheme is more suitable for future small cell deployments in terms of
reducing UE power consumption. Another benefit from implementing UL RSs
in small cell networks is that enhanced location and UE tracking can be effec-
tively and accurately achieved [40]. This opens the possibility of new prospects
in location-aware services and network optimization, for example allowing the
prediction of the UEs position and enabling proactive Radio Resource Man-
agement (RRM) strategies. This facilitates, for example, that any necessary
information can be pre-fetched in advance, thus contributing to optimized end-
to-end latency [40]. A direct application of this may be to proactively initiate
the key exchange once a handover is deemed predictable.
3. System model
Thispaperconsidersasmallcellenvironmentwheretheparticipatingmobile
devices (i.e. UEs) are using NC for D2D communications. More specifically,
mobiledevicesuseRLNCforD2Dcommunicationandthesemobiledevicesare
connected to the core network through small cell hotspots or BSs. Further,
2Amobiledevicein3GPPterminology. Bothtermswillbeusedinterchangeably.
13
we consider the BSs in the network have an inbuilt functionality termed as
blockchain-based security and HO (BSH) controller. These BSs can potentially
be any equipment (e.g. a pico/micro/macro BS, mobile devices, etc.) that
have both the computational capacity and the capability of providing cellular
services over a small area, i.e. a small cell. We term such a cell as a BSH-
enabledcell,orBSH-cell. TheseBSHcontrollersformablockchainoverlaythat
servesasasecuredistributedledgertosupporttheintegrityschemeandthekey
management protocol presented in this paper. All mobile devices, referred also
as nodes in the NC and blockchain context, are connected to at least one BSH-
controllerthroughasecurecontrolchannel,asshowninfig. 1. Particularly,this
work focuses on the key exchanges that happen during the HO process when
a node that is part of the NC-enabled communication network in one BSH-cell
movestoanotherBSH-cellinordertobepartoftheNC-enabledcommunication
in the destination BSH-cell.
3.1. Blockchain-based security and handover controller
Blockchain is a distributed and decentralized ledger where data is stored
as immutable and secure blocks [41]. In the proposed scheme, we consider a
blockchainimplementationenabledbybigchainDBinwhichtheBSHcontrollers
areconsideredasthebigchainDBnodes, asshowninFig.1. ThebigchainDBis
adistributeddatabasewithblockchainfeatures. Itensuresimmutablestorageof
informationasconnectedblocksandalsoenablesquerybaseddataretrievalfrom
thisledger. EachBSH-cellcomprisesasecuritydomainthathasitsownkeysto
ensuretheintegrityoftheRLNCcommunication. AnyUEthatexistsinagiven
BSH-cellareconsideredbelongingtothesamesecuritydomain. Inaddition, all
HO and security management of all UEs within a BSH-cell are taken care of
by the BSH controller as an internal HO. All HO and security management of
users moving across BSH-cells are taken care of by the BSH controllers of the
corresponding BSH-cells in a distributed manner using the blockchain. To this
end,theHOisalsoperformedinadistributedmannerbetweenBSHcontrollers
of different security domains and their corresponding BSH-cells. Even though
14
Figure1: KeyexchangethroughtheblockchainoverlayofBSHcontrollers. Numberedarrows
representdifferentstepsintheHOprocedure.
15
UEs are not part of the bigchainDB network, they can send information to
be stored in the bigchainDB ledger to the nearest BSH controller and it will
be included in the next candidate block, i.e. a block which will eventually be
stored in the bigchainDB. Similarly, UEs can query the nearest BSH controller
for the information stored whenever necessary.
Fortheintegrityscheme, oncethetagsarecreatedatthesourcenode, these
tags are also uploaded to the ledger. Any receiving node can verify the packet
integritybycomparingthetagsreceivedviathecommunicationchannelandthe
tagsfetchedfromtheBSHcontroller. Thisensuresthattheproposedschemeis
secureagainstbothdatapollutionaswellastagpollutionattacks[42]. However,
thisintegrityschemealsorequiresasetofkeys. Theblockchainoverlaycanalso
be used to ensure that these keys are properly shared with the users that are
part of the network even if they move from one BSH-cell to another one.
3.2. Proposed Blockchain based Key Management Scheme
In the MAC-based integrity scheme, the source node creates some security
tags over the native packets. These tags are attached to the packets before
transmission as well as shared within the network through the blockchain over-
layimplementedusingbigchainDB[43]. Areceivingnodecanverifytheauthen-
ticity of the tags received through the communication channel by comparing it
with the corresponding tags stored in the bighchainDB and then verify the in-
tegrityofthepacketsbyrecreatingthetagsusingthesharedsecretkeyoverthe
receivedpackets. Theintegrityschemein[23]considersaverystrongadversary
conditionwheretheadversarymayhaveaccesstoallthekeysusedbythesource
node but still not be able to bypass the integrity check. This simplifies the key
distribution process since all the participating nodes can have access to all the
keys used to create the tags.
However, in a dense small cell environment, distributing keys to every par-
ticipatingnodedirectlybyasinglekeydistributionentitymaynotbepractical.
Further, different small cells may belong to different BSH controllers and hence
different security domains depending on their location, service provider, and
16
application background. Thus the keys for the integrity scheme may be shared
within a BSH-cell. Every node (e.g. a UE) in a particular BSH-cell shall have
access to the set of keys used in that cell so that it can verify the integrity of
packets being generated and transmitted in that BSH-cell. However, any new
nodeenteringanewBSH-cellshouldalsoacquirethissetofkeysaspartoftheir
authentication to be part of the NC communications in the BSH-cell. This is
also applicable to a node moving from one BSH-cell to another one. This is
enabledbythedistributedoverlayoftheBSHcontrollerssimilartotheconcept
in [10].
Thekeymanagementhappensintwomajorphases. Theinitialphase,which
can be termed as the pre-distribution phase, happens during the initialization
of the network. Each BSH-controller will have its own set of keys and these
keys are shared with the nodes authenticated under the particular BSH con-
troller. The second phase of the key management happens dynamically when
a new node is entering the network or a node is moving from one BSH-cell
to another one. At this stage, the node will have to be authenticated by the
BSH controller and given access to the set of keys used for integrity check in
that BSH-cell. If the node is moving from one BSH-cell to another, the set
of keys used in the target BSH-cell should be shared with the incoming node
during the HO process. In our proposed approach this is achieved through a
distributedledger,contrarytotraditionalapproacheswherethehostandtarget
controllers communicate directly during the HOs. Every BSH controller is part
of the blockchain overlay as described in [42]. This ensures that if a node has
entered a target BSH-cell, the keys associated with the particular cell will be
stored in the distributed ledger and the next incoming node will not have to
repeat the same procedure. The serving BSH controller of this new incoming
node has access to the distributed ledger and can directly share the set of keys
used in the target BSH-cell with the mobile node. This reduces the number of
signal exchanges required for the key distribution during HO. In this paper, we
focus on the impact of this key sharing scheme on the HO procedure.
Whenever a node request for a HO, the target BSH controller will upload
17
the set of keys that are used in that cell to the blockchain as a candidate
block. As per the requirements of HMAC-based integrity scheme proposed
in [23], a key is a vector defined in the finite field Fn+1 where Fn+1 is the
q q
field of RLNC operations, n is the native packet size, and q is the field size.
The blockchain will validate the candidate blocks during the collection period
between two block verifications and once the candidate block is validated, the
source BSH controller will also have a copy of the verified block through the
consensus achieved in the blockchain and it can share the required keys with
the node that is undergoing HO. This validation of blocks is the major activity
duringthedynamickeymanagementphase. Thiskeysharingisperformedalong
with the authentication process during HO since not all nodes in the network
needs to hold the keys for all the small cells. Only those mobile nodes which
moves to a new small cell may get it from the BSH controller and it is done as
partoftheHOsignalling. AstepbystepdescriptionoftheHOprocessisshown
in fig. 1 and discussed in subsection 3.3. Noteworthy, all the nodes requesting
HOs between the validation of two consecutive blocks will be served with the
keys once the new block is updated to the blockchain.
Once a BSH controller stores its key set to the blockchain, any further in-
comingnode(viaHO)willhaveeasyaccesstothatspecificsetofkeys. Sincethe
blockchainisanexpandinglistofrecords,averifiedblockwillneverbemodified
and always be available to the participating nodes. Further, it is a distributed
anddecentralizedledgersothat,onceablockisverifiedandaddedtothechain,
itwillbeavailablenotonlytotheBSHcontrollerwhichinitiatedtherequestbut
withalltheBSHcontrollerswhicharepartoftheblockchain. Thusanyfurther
noderequestingaHOcanbeservedwiththekeysdirectlyfromthesourceBSH
controller. Further, all the candidate blocks during a specific collection period
will be updated to the blockchain in a single block verification. This reduces
the overhead of signaling considerably in a dense network of mobile nodes. A
detailed analysis of the advantages of this proposed scheme is presented in 4
and the HO scheme is explained in 3.3.
18
3.3. Uplink Reference Signal based Handover Scheme for Small Cells
An overview of the UL-HO scheme with a blockchain-based key manage-
ment protocol is presented in this subsection, according to Fig. 2. The actions
related to the blockchain-based key management mentioned in this subsection
are the actual procedures followed during the dynamic key management phase,
explainedasdifferentphasesduringtheHOprocess. Inthemeasurementphase,
the UE transmits UL RSs reaching the serving BS (s-BS) and nearby BSs, a
subsetofwhicharecandidateHOtargetBSs(t-BSs). Boththes-BSHcontroller
andthet-BSHcontrollersperformtheULRSmeasurementsandeithercommu-
nicate this information to each other, assuming that each of the involved BSs
implements a BSH cell and employ a BSH controller, or to a central network
BSH controller, where the s-BSs and t-BSs belong to. In the latter case, the
centralized network BSH controller processes these measurements to determine
which BS shall serve the UE, as shown in Fig. 2. For this purpose, the network
BSH controller checks if the UL RS received power (UL RSRP) of any of the
candidate t-BSs is higher than the s-BS by an offset called UL-offset and this
conditionismaintainedwithinatimedefinedbyULtimetotrigger(UL-TTT).
When a suitable t-BSs is identified, the network BSH controller takes the HO
decisionandsendsthepotentialt-BSinformationtothes-BS.Incases-BSand
t-BSs employ their own BSH controllers, this decision is taken in a distributed
manner among the corresponding s-BSH and t-BSHs controllers.
In the next phase, known as HO preparation phase, the s-BS sends the HO
request to the t-BS. Upon successful admission control, the t-BSH controller
shares the keys, where each key vector is defined in the finite field Fn+1, with
q
the s-BSH controller either directly, in case of a distributed setup, or via the
centralized entity where the network BSH controller belongs to. In LTE such
a centralized entity may be the Mobility Management Entity (MME), while in
5G New Radio (NR) it may be the Access and Mobility Management Function
(AMF). Once the key sharing is completed, the t-BS acknowledges the HO
request to s-BS.
NowtheHOexecutionphasestartswherethes-BSsendsaHOcommandto
19
Centralized or distributed Blockchain
BSH Controller centralized server
UE s-BSH t-BSH entity UDG
s tn Legend
e m UL RS UL RS L3 signalling
e ru Measurements Measurements L1/L2 signalling
s
a
e
M HO decision User Data
UL RS
Measurements
n
o Handover request Tx
O
ita
Hra Encrypted keys to the
p
e r blockchain
P
Admission Control
Blockchain (registered) keys
(encrypted)
Handover request Ack List of Abbreviations
BS Base Station
BSH Blockchain-based
Security and Handover
2. HOcmd Tx
s-BSH serving BSH
t-BSH target BSH
Encrypted keys to DL Downlink
eNB eNodeB
the nodeDeliver buffered s-eNBserving eNodeB
Detach from and in transit t-eNB target eNodeB
HO Handover
s-cell and packets to t-eNB RACH Random Access Channel
n UDG User Data Gateway
o synchronize to Data Forwarding UE User Equipment
it
u c t-eNB Buffer packets
UL RS Uplink Reference Signal
e
x from s-eNB
E
O 3. Synchronisation (RACH Tx)
H
4. HOconf Tx
packet data
packet data
n
o
ite Switch DL path
lp
m packet data
o Release
C
O Resources
H
HO Complete Tx
Figure 2: Uplink Reference Signal based HO (UL-HO) scheme with blockchain-based key
20
management.
UE.TheUEstartsaccessingthet-BSthrougharandomaccessprocedure. Upon
successful synchronization with the t-BS, the UE sends a HO confirm message
to the t-BS. The s-BS shares the keys, where each key vector is defined in the
finite field Fn+1 where n is the packet size and q is the field size, with the UE
q
andreleasestheresources. Inourapproach,thefieldsizeissetto28 andpacket
size is 1024 bytes, unless specified otherwise. Finally, the t-BS sends a HO
complete message to the s-BS to inform the success of the HO procedure when
the DL data path is switched from the user data gateway (UDG) toward the
t-BS. The UDG is defined as the serving gateway (SGW) in LTE and the User
Plane Function (UPF) in NR. It is to be noted that all the communications
related to the keys and other information are encrypted as per the standard
security protocols.
It has to be noted that in the case where the centralized entity and the
network BSH controller are assumed, the key sharing step between the t-BS
and s-BS may not be necessary. Only when the security domains are different
fordifferentBSH-cells,theHOsbetweendifferentBSH-cellsrequirekeysharing
for the integrity scheme. In the context of this paper, only such HOs are of
interest. In addition, the key sharing as we described in 3.2 happens differently
for the initial and subsequent HOs. For the initial HO to a particular t-BS,
when the UE requests for a HO (Step 1 in Fig. 1), the t-BS shares its key
set to the blockchain server as a candidate block (Step 2). Once this block is
verified and added to the blockchain (Step 3), every BSH controller including
the s-BSH controller will receive this block (Step 4). This is performed as
part of the admission control in the HO preparation phase, as shown in Fig. 2.
However, with the UL-HO scheme, possible HOs can also be predicted earlier
to avoid delay in verifying the block and updating the blockchain. Then at
the HO completion phase, this set of keys are shared by the s-BS to the UE
requested the HO (Step 5). From the second HO request to the same t-BS, the
blockchain already has the keys stored in it. This eliminates the requirement
of any signaling in the HO preparation phase for further handovers and the key
set can be sent to the UE at the HO completion phase by the s-BS, as shown
21
in Fig. 2 and step 5 of Fig. 1.
4. Analysis
This section presents a performance evaluation of the proposed blockchain
enhanced key management protocol for MAC-based integrity scheme combined
with an UL-HO scheme. The performance of the proposed scheme is evalu-
ated by means of simulations and compared to the other two prominent key
management schemes, namely HMAC and MacSig. The evaluation analysis is
performed in terms of security, bandwidth and signaling overhead.
4.1. Simulation Scenario and Assumptions
4.1.1. Network Topology and Mobility Assumptions
The simulation scenario is shown in Fig. 3 which contains sixteen BSH con-
trollerswithinter-sitedistance(ISD)of100minaMATLABbasedsystem-level
simulator. Thecellwrap-aroundfeatureisincludedtohavefairinterferencecon-
ditions across the simulated area where a set of 20 UEs are randomly placed
accordingtoauniformdistribution. TheUEsmoveatafixedspeedof60km/h
withrandomdirections[0°, 360°]toresemblethescenariowiththeUEsmoving
on private vehicles (i.e. cars). The UL-HO procedure is used with a UL RS
periodicity of 160 ms, UL-offset of 1 dB, and UL-TTT of 32 ms. The UL RS
periodicityreferstotherateatwhichaUEtransmitsitsreferencesignalsinthe
UL. UL-offset defines the difference in UL RS power conditioning the HO from
as-BSHtot-BSH,whileUL-TTTdefinesthetime-to-triggertheHOprocedure.
The reason for choosing low UL-offset and UL-TTT is because of keeping HO
rate to its minimal level at high speed (see [44] for details of HO parameters
selection for the DL-HO case). Similarly, high UL RS periodicity is selected to
reduce the rate of unnecessary HOs. Simulation assumptions and parameters
are summarized in Table. 1. Further details regarding the simulator modeling,
UL RS model, and the parameters used are covered in [11].
22
Figure3: Consideredsimulationscenario.
Table1: Simulationassumptionsandmainparameters.
Model Parameter Value/Derivation
Network Cells 16
ISD 100 m
Interference cell wrap-around
UEs 20
UE speed 60 km/h
UE direction random from [0°, 360°]
HO procedure UL RS periodicity 160 ms
UL-offset 1 dB
UL-TTT 32 ms
Secure NC Field size 28
Packet size 1024 bytes
Generation size 32
23
4.1.2. Secure NC Related Assumptions
DifferentBSHcontrollersinthesimulationscenarioareconsideredasdiffer-
ent security domains. In other words, each BSH-cell has its own set of security
keys used for secure NC-enabled communications inside the BSH-cell. We con-
sider an RLNC-enabled network in which D2D communication is supported.
The finite field size of q = 28, packet size of 1024 bytes, and generation size
of 32 are considered as the network parameters unless specified and these as-
sumptions are summarized in Table. 1. The proposed blockchain overlay is en-
abledbyBigchainDB[43],adistributedanddecentralizedledgerwithblockchain
properties. BigchainDB uses Tendermint Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) for
achieving consensus within the decentralized network, providing an immutable
decentralized data storage. Further, it also provides quick verification of blocks
andachievesconsensusmuchfastercomparedtomanyotherblockchainmodels.
The bigchainDB server is hosted on a local machine and Postman API collab-
oration platform is used to enable web query based communication with the
server.
4.2. Comparison of Different Schemes
This subsection presents the comparison and analysis of the proposed ap-
proach with different schemes in the literature. This analysis done for both the
security of the approaches as well as the signaling cost. The blockchain-based
securityandhandovercontrolensuresasecuredistributedmobilitymanagement
for NC-enabled small cell environments. The blockchain-based dynamic mobil-
itymanagementschemes[45]arealreadyknowntoaddresshierarchicalsecurity
issuesinedgeandfognetworksandourproposedapproachcanalsobecompared
in this aspect and ensures there is no single point of failure and no hierarchi-
cal dependencies. The distributed key management scheme proposed allows a
newnodetojointhenetworkanytimeafterproperauthenticationperformedby
the BSH controller and any existing node can also leave the network without
effecting other participants. This ensures that the proposed key management
scheme has proper forward and backward security. Furthermore, in case of an
24
existing node moving from one cell to another, the proposed approach ensures
the keys required for the integrity schemes are shared through the distributed
ledger, keeping the security of the network intact. However, the proposed key
management protocol is used only for the integrity schemes currently, not for
general authentication of participating nodes, making the security analysis to
be more focused on the defense against pollution attacks. Additional applica-
tions of the proposed approach for authentication and further security analysis
of the proposed approaches are to be considered as the possible extensions of
this work.
4.2.1. Security Against Pollution Attacks
ThelevelofsecurityagainstpollutionattacksusingMACswilldependupon
the field size used for the operations as well as the number of tags/keys used in
theintegrityscheme. InmostofthepracticalapplicationsofRLNC,afieldsize
of 28 is used. If q is the field size, then a single tag attached to the packet will
ensure that the probability of an adversary successfully introducing a polluted
packettothenetworkandpassthroughthetagverificationsis1/q. Practically,
this security may not be sufficient for all the applications and we generally use
multipletagstoincreasethesecurityoftheintegrityscheme. Iflnumberoftags
are attached to the packets, then we can achieve a security level of 1/ql with
a bandwidth overhead of l/(m+n) over the coded packet where m and n are
generation size and packet size respectively. Thus in a field size of 28, a single
tag attached to the packet provides a security level of 1/28 against pollution
attack.
Anothermainfactorthataffectsthesecurityoftheintegrityschemeandthe
number of tags is the probability of colluding adversaries. Multiple adversaries
maycooperatetosuccessfullybypasstheintegritycheck. Mostofthepreviously
existing integrity schemes addressed this challenge by employing specific key
distribution schemes so that the participating nodes may not have all the keys
used by the source node to create tags. However, this method has multiple
drawbacks and scalability issues. In such cases, the number of tags attached
25
to each packet will also depend on the probability of colluding attackers. For
example, in a c-cover free set system based key distribution, the source node
should have at least c times the number of keys than any other participating
node to achieve security against c colluding attackers [7].
In a dense cell environment, the probability of colluding attackers may be
very high and it will also increase the number of tags required to provide suf-
ficient security. This probability will depend on the authentication protocols
followed in the network and security standards of the participating devices.
Furthermore, the overhead due to these increased tags will not provide equiva-
lent security to the number of tags attached, but only equal to the number of
tagsthatcanbeverifiedataparticularnode. Inotherwords, evenifLnumber
of tags are attached to the packets by the source node and transmitted across
the network, a receiving node that holds only l keys can verify only that many
tags and thus provide a security level of 1/ql only. This results in a mismatch
between the bandwidth overhead of the system and the security level.
Ourproposedapproachaddressestheseproblemsbysharingthetagsthrough
notonlythecommunicationchannelbutalsotheblockchainsothatanadversary
cannotmodifythepacketsandcreatevalidtagseveniftheyhaveallthesecret
keys. In our scheme, we consider a strong adversary that can possess all the
secret keys that are used for tag creation. However, since the original tags
are shared directly by the source node to the blockchain, an adversary can not
modify the tags that are stored in the blockchain. Thus even if it creates valid
tagsforapollutedpacket,thenextgenuinereceiverwilldiscardthepacketsince
itwillnotmatchthecorrespondingtagsstoredintheblockchain. Thissituation
does not differ even if multiple adversaries are colluding to bypass the integrity
check. Since our integrity scheme does not require a key distribution protocol
that depends on the number of adversaries in the network, we can allow all the
users to have the complete key set and verify all the tags that are attached to
the packets. Thus in our key management scheme, all the keys in a security
domain will be available to all the participating users in that security domain.
This will also allow the system to achieve a high-security level solely depending
26
onthenumberoftagsattachedtoit. Furthermore,thekeymanagementscheme
is easier to implement since all the keys can be provided to any new incoming
node.
The security level achieved by all the integrity schemes [23, 8, 9] per node
is the same if the same number of tags are verified at that node. However, for
other comparable integrity schemes [8, 9], the key distribution should happen
through a random distribution. In these schemes, the number of keys in total
and the number of keys provided to a participating node also depends on the
number of colluding adversaries in the network. More specifically, the number
of tags required to provide at least 1 − (cid:15) probability of having c-secure key
distribution in the network is defined by the equation 1 where d is a security
parameter.
1 1
L= e(c+1)ln . (1)
(1−d) (cid:15)
The bandwidth incurred by l number of tags for [8] is presented in (2) and
for[9]isshownin(3)wherem,n,q arethegenerationsize, packetsizeandfield
size respectively.
l+1 32l
B = + . (2)
MacSig m+n q(m+n)
l+1
B = . (3)
HMAC m+n
Since our integrity scheme allows every node to have the complete set of
keys, thenumberoftagsthatcanbeverifiedataparticularnodeismaximized.
Ifotherintegrityschemesrequiretoachievethesamelevelofsecurity,theyneed
to have a larger number of tags attached to the packet and more keys stored
at the source node. Fig. 4 shows a comparison of the bandwidth overhead due
to the number of tags to achieve the same level of security in different schemes
againstdifferentnumbersofadversariespresentinthenetwork. Thebandwidth
overheadoftheproposedapproachisverylowandremainsthesameirrespective
of the number of colluding attackers while the other schemes incur a steady
increase in the bandwidth overhead with an increase in number of colluding
27
attackers. This is because of the dependency of the other schemes such as [8, 9]
onthenumberofkeysthatcanbedistributedtotheparticipatingnodesagainst
colluding adversaries as explained with eqations 2 and 3. If there are more
adversaries in the network, these schemes require more tags to be attached to
the packets increasing the bandwidth overhead. Our proposed approach allows
eachparticipanttohaveallthekeys,thusdonotrequiresuchagradualincrease
in the number of tags to defend multiple adversaries. This ensures that the
bandwidth overhead remains low irrespective of the number of adversaries in
the network with the proposed approach.
On the other hand, the probability of having a safe set of keys in the pres-
ence of colluding adversaries if the bandwidth overhead due to tags is made to
constant is shown in Fig. 5. In the proposed scheme, this probability of having
safe keys is fixed to the probability of randomly guessing the valid keys while
in the other comparable schemes this is inversely proportional to the number
of colluding attackers. This also means that the probability of safe keys in the
networkremainsunaffectedbythenumberofcolludingadversariesandremains
close to 1. However, this probability will depend on the number of keys used in
the integrtiy scheme. If we use only one key, the probability will be 1−(1/q)
andifweuselkeys,theprobabilityofsafekeyswillbe1−(1/ql). Weconsidered
8 tags attached to each packet and the number of colluding attackers varying
Figure4: Bandwidthoverheadatcomparablesituations.
28
Figure5: Probabilityofsafekeysinthenetwork.
from 1 to 7 for the analysis shown in Fig. 5.
4.2.2. Signaling Overhead
In case of a UE moving from one BSH-cell to another one, the set of keys
used in the destination cell needs to be shared with the node during HO. In
traditionalapproaches,likedoublerandomkeydistributionorc-coverfreebased
key distribution, only a random subset of the keys can be shared with the
incoming node. This requires the t-BS to select a specific set of keys to be
sharedwiththeincomingnodeandpassittothes-BS.Thisprocessistriggered
byeveryHOrequest. Inotherwords,foreveryHOrequest,twosignalexchanges
(one from t-BS to s-BS and another one from s-BS to UE) are required in both
doublerandomkeydistributionandc-coverfreebasedkeydistribution. Onthe
other hand, in our integrity scheme, the signaling overhead for key distribution
is different for the initial and subsequent HOs as explained in section 3.3.
Inourproposedscheme,thekeysaresharedthroughthebigchainDB.Inthis
approach, for the initial HO, the key sharing involves three signals, one from
t-BS to the bigchainDB server sharing the candidate block including the keys,
second one from the server to other bigchainDB nodes including s-BS with the
verified block, and a last one where the keys are shared to the corresponding
userfroms-BS.Ontheotherhand, thesubsequentHOstothatparticulart-BS
29
will not require the initial two transactions since the keys are already stored in
the distributed database. It only requires the s-BS to provide the required keys
to theusermoving to the t-BS.Thus, thesignaling overhead in ourapproachis
3 transactions for the initial HO and one for the subsequent HOs. Further, the
signaling for updating the ledger in each node includes all the verified blocks
within that period and if multiple HO requests are handled during that time,
onlyasinglecommunicationfromthebigchainDBserverwillserveallthoseHO
requests. It has also to be noted that the initial three transactions are required
only for the first HO request to a particular t-BS irrespective of the s-BS since
alltheBSsarepartofthedistributedoverlayandwillreceivetheverifiedblock
during the process.
The benefits of our integrity scheme in terms of signaling is analyzed as per
thesimulationscenarioprovidedinsection4.1. Thenumberofsignalexchanges
of the different key distribution schemes are shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen
that the new blockchain-based approach outperforms the existing key distribu-
tion schemes and, as time progresses, the curve levels out. As depicted in the
graph,theproposedkeymanagementschemerequiresahighernumberofsignal
exchanges in the initial phase since each initial HO requires three transactions
in the proposed scheme compared to two in the traditional approach. However,
at 2700 ms, we have the first beneficiary of the proposed scheme when a new
UE is moving to a small cell that has already stored its keys in the blockchain.
This happens as a result of the s-BS already having the keys required by the
UE and these keys can be immediately passed to the UE in a single signaling
transaction.
Themarkedpoint2showswhen15outofthe16BSH-cellsalreadystoredthe
keysintheblockchainandanyUEmovingtothese15BSH-cellscandirectlyget
therequiredkeysfromtheirsourceBSasexplainedintheHOcompletionphase
of Fig. 2, requiring only one signal exchange against the two signal exchanges
required in the other schemes. It can be seen from the graph that very soon,
the total number of signal exchanges of the proposed approach becomes lower
than the other existing approaches. The last marked point in Fig 6 shows the
30
140
s
120
e
g
n100
a
h
c x 80 3
e
y
e K 60 2
fo
.o
40
1
No. of signal exchanges for MacSig and HMAC
N
20
No. of signal exchanges for Proposed scheme
0
052 003 004 054 056 007 008 0001 0011 0541 0071 0502 0542 0052 0062 0072 0572 0572 0592 0592 0003 0013 0513 0533 0073 0024 0534 0544 0054 0054 0084 0005 0505 0505 0035 0065 0085 0506 0066 0576 0047 0547 0557 0067 0508 0518 0518 0528 0538 0538 0548 0068 0068 0568 0588 0509 0529 0539 0569
Instances of new handovers (Time in ms)
Figure6: Numberofkeyexchangesfordifferentschemes.
instance where all the small cells have received at least one new user and thus
stores their keys in the blockchain. After this point, any HO in the proposed
schemewillrequireonlyasinglesignalexchangebetweenthesourceBSandthe
UE for the key exchange and from this point each handover will require only
half the number of signal exchanges in the proposed approach compared to the
othercomparableschemes. Thisgraphispreparedbasedonoursimulationsfor
10 s but has not considered the delay due to block validation. A detailed study
considering the latency and a practical scenario for key sharing is discussed in
the next subsection and presented in Fig. 7.
4.2.3. Latency
The blockchain-based key distribution introduces some latency in the key
sharing process due to the block verification and consensus process. In the
traditional approaches, the key sharing was a direct decision by the t-BS and
there was only a procedural delay to choose a random set of keys or a carefully
chosen subset of keys for the incoming node. However, in the blockchain-based
approach, the keys need to be sent as a candidate block to the server and then
verified and added as a verified block in the chain. Due to the security require-
ments of block verification and reaching consensus, this process introduces a
delayinthekeyexchange.Theverificationtimebetweentwoblocksiscalledthe
collection period and all the transactions that are received during this time will
31
beaddedtoasingleblockintheblockchain. InbigchainDB,theminimumtime
required between the verification of two blocks is one second. This results in a
maximum delay of 1 s for a key sharing during HO and introduces the latency
in the network. However, at every block verification, all the valid candidate
transactions will be verified and added to the chain in a single go. This implies
thatiftherearemultipleUEsrequestingHOsduringthecollectionperiod,then
all of the required keys will be served to them once the next block is verified.
From a signaling perspective, this will reduce the number of signals from the
bigchainDB server to other participating nodes (BSH controllers) to a single
broadcast of the verified block per second. In this case, after every block veri-
fication, the nodes will update their local ledger with the newly verified block.
Thus in a real case scenario, the per-second signaling (N ) for our proposed
sig
keymanagementschemeisthesumofthenumberofBSHcontrollersthathave
to store their keys to the blockchain (n ) and the number of UEs requesting
bsh
HO (n ) along with one database update signal as shown in (4):
ue
N =n +n +1. (4)
sig bsh ue
Furthermore, the UL-HO scheme helps to predict the possible handovers in
advance,whichcanbeusedtotacklethisissueoflatency. Wehaveanalyzedthe
impactofthispredictionoffutureHOswith80%accuracytoseehowthishelps
toreducethesignaling(Weconsideredthe80%asarepresentativeaveragevalue
of the best case of an 100% accurate prediction and a lower acceptable rate of
60%). ThisanalysisshowsthatwiththehelpofULRSbasedpredictionofHOs,
theproposedkeymanagementschememayhaveaslightlylargernumberofkey
exchanges initially, but a cumulative analysis of the number of key exchanges
shows that this prediction helps to achieve a smaller number of key exchanges
and thus improve the energy efficiency. This is happening because of the larger
number of BSH-cells are required to exchange their keys with another cell ini-
tially and this results in larger number of signals being exchanged in the initial
instances. However, once a BSH-cell has registered its keys in the blockchain,
32
500
s
e g400
n
a
h
c300
x
E
y
e200
K
fo
Traditional Scheme
.o
N
100
Proposed scheme
Proposed Scheme with Prediction
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Time (s)
Figure7: Cumulativekeyexchangesforextendedtimespan.
any further incoming nodes can get the keys with a single signal exchange with
its s-BSH making the cumulative number of signal exchanges to go lower than
the non predictive scenario very quickly.
In both cases, the number of signal exchanges remains almost half of the
number of signal exchanges required in traditional approaches clearly showing
theimprovementsoftheproposedkeymanagementscheme. Figure7showsthe
cumulative number of signal exchanges for a 60 s time frame considering the
block verification delay with and without prediction and Fig. 8 shows the per
second signal exchanges for the proposed scheme with and without prediction
comparedtothetraditionalkeysharingschemes. Althoughtheproposedscheme
introduces a latency, in a real scenario, the signaling costs are considerably
reducedbytheproposedblockchain-basedkeysharingwiththeUL-HOscheme.
Furthemore, only the first incoming HO will require three signal exchanges
and any further HOs will require only a single key exchange in the proposed
approach. On the other hand, the traditional schemes will require two signal
exchangesineveryHO.Thisalsoindicatesthatanextrapolationofthescenario
to larger number of small cells and users will result in better results with the
proposed approach.
33
25
s e 20 Traditional Scheme
g Proposed Scheme
n
a h c15 Proposed Scheme with Prediction
x
E
y
e K10
fo
.o
5
N
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Time (s)
Figure8: Numberofkeyexchangespersecond.
5. Conclusions
Since the 5G and beyond systems are expected to deploy dense small-cell
networks,NC-enabledsmallcellenvironmentswithD2Dcommunicationisben-
eficialforalargemajorityofapplicationsrangingfromhigh-speedcontentdistri-
bution to virtual reality applications. Ensuring security while the participating
nodes move around multiple small cells and addressing the challenges of mo-
bility requirements with energy efficiency are among the major constraints to
be addressed to enable such scenarios. As we focus on the integrity schemes
for NC-enabled environments, the keys used for MAC creation and verification
needs to be properly distributed in the network. Even if a new node enters
the network or an existing node moves from one security domain to another, it
should be assigned with the required keys to be part of the secure network cod-
ing environment. This paper describes a distributed key management protocol
which address the issue of key sharing for mobile nodes.
TheproposedintegratingapproachcombiningaUL-HOschemeandblockchain-
based key management protocol ensures an energy efficient secure NC-enabled
small cell environment. We observe that the overheads due to the blockchain-
based key management scheme are significantly smaller compared to the tradi-
tional key management approaches and the UL-HO scheme has better energy
efficiency compared to the legacy HO schemes. The analysis of the integrated
34
approach using the concept of BSH controllers shows that it provides higher
security against colluding adversaries and achieves a high level of security with
a lower number of MACs and also reduces the signaling overhead during the
HO process. The signaling during the HO process becomes linear with respect
to the number of HO requests. As the time progresses, it further reduces by
halfthenumberofsignalexchangesrequiredwhencomparedtootherkeyman-
agement schemes. This proposed approach ensures that the integrity scheme
forsecureNC-enablednextgenerationnetworkscanworkflawlesslyinamobile
environment.
Acknowledgment
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant
agreement No 722424
References
[1] M. Agiwal, A. Roy, N. Saxena, Next generation 5g wireless networks: A
comprehensive survey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 18 (3)
(2016) 1617–1655.
[2] A. Gupta, R. K. Jha, A survey of 5g network: Architecture and emerging
technologies, IEEE access 3 (2015) 1206–1232.
[3] S. Mumtaz, K. M. S. Huq, J. Rodriguez, Direct mobile-to-mobile commu-
nication: Paradigm for 5g, IEEE Wireless Communications 21 (5) (2014)
14–23.
[4] J. Rodriguez, A. Radwan, C. Barbosa, F. H. Fitzek, R. A. Abd-Alhameed,
J. Noras, S. M. Jones, I. Politis, P. Galiotos, G. Schulte, et al., Secret - se-
cure network coding for reduced energy next generation mobile small cells:
A european training network in wireless communications and networking
35
for5g,in: 2017InternetTechnologiesandApplications(ITA),IEEE,2017,
pp. 329–333.
[5] L. F. Vieira, M. A. Vieira, Network coding for 5g network and d2d com-
munication, in: Proceedings of the 13th ACM Symposium on QoS and
Security for Wireless and Mobile Networks, 2017, pp. 113–120.
[6] S. Agrawal, D. Boneh, Homomorphic macs: Mac-based integrity for net-
work coding, in: International Conference on Applied Cryptography and
Network Security, Springer, 2009, pp. 292–305.
[7] R.Canetti,J.Garay,G.Itkis,D.Micciancio,M.Naor,B.Pinkas,Multicast
security: A taxonomy and some efficient constructions, in: IEEE INFO-
COM’99. Conference on Computer Communications. Proceedings. Eigh-
teenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communica-
tions Societies. The Future is Now (Cat. No. 99CH36320), Vol. 2, IEEE,
1999, pp. 708–716.
[8] P. Zhang, Y. Jiang, C. Lin, H. Yao, A. Wasef, X. Shenz, Padding for
orthogonality: Efficient subspace authentication for network coding, in:
2011 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1026–1034.
[9] A. Esfahani, G. Mantas, J. Rodriguez, J. C. Neves, An efficient homomor-
phic mac-based scheme against data and tag pollution attacks in network
coding-enabled wireless networks, International Journal of Information Se-
curity 16 (6) (2017) 627–639.
[10] V. Adat, T. Akhtar, I. Politis, C. Tselios, S. Kotsopoulos, Towards secure
network coding enabled mobile small cells, in: 2019 IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference (GLOBECOM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[11] M. Tayyab, G. P. Koudouridis, X. Gelabert, R. J¨antti, Uplink reference
signalsforenergy-efficienthandover,IEEEAccess8(2020)163060–163079.
[12] R. Ahlswede, N. Cai, S.-Y. Li, R. W. Yeung, Network information flow,
IEEE Transactions on information theory 46 (4) (2000) 1204–1216.
36
[13] S.-Y. Li, R. W. Yeung, N. Cai, Linear network coding, IEEE transactions
on information theory 49 (2) (2003) 371–381.
[14] T.Ho,M.Medard,J.Shi,M.Effros,D.R.Karger,Onrandomizednetwork
coding, in: Proceedings of the Annual Allerton Conference on Communi-
cation Control and Computing, Vol. 41, Citeseer, 2003, pp. 11–20.
[15] T. Ho, M. M´edard, R. Koetter, D. R. Karger, M. Effros, J. Shi, B. Leong,
Arandomlinearnetworkcodingapproachtomulticast,IEEETransactions
on Information Theory 52 (10) (2006) 4413–4430.
[16] P.TorresCompta,F.H.Fitzek,D.E.Lucani,Networkcodingisthe5gkey
enablingtechnology: effectsandstrategiestomanageheterogeneouspacket
lengths,TransactionsonEmergingTelecommunicationsTechnologies26(1)
(2015) 46–55.
[17] R. Bassoli, H. Marques, J. Rodriguez, K. W. Shum, R. Tafazolli, Network
codingtheory: Asurvey,IEEECommunicationsSurveys&Tutorials15(4)
(2013) 1950–1978.
[18] V.A.Vasudevan,C.Tselios,I.Politis,Onsecurityagainstpollutionattacks
innetworkcodingenabled5gnetworks,IEEEAccess8(2020)38416–38437.
[19] R. Parsamehr, A. Esfahani, G. Mantas, A. Radwan, S. Mumtaz, J. Ro-
driguez, J. Mart´ınez-Ortega, A novel intrusion detection and prevention
scheme for network coding-enabled mobile small cells, IEEE Transactions
on Computational Social Systems 6 (6) (2019) 1467–1477.
[20] R. Parsamehr, G. Mantas, J. Rodriguez, J.-F. Martinez-Ortega, Idlp: an
efficient intrusion detection and location-aware prevention mechanism for
network coding-enabled mobile small cells, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 43863–
43875.
[21] T.Lawrence,F.Li,I.Ali,M.Y.Kpiebaareh,C.R.Haruna,T.Christopher,
Anhmac-basedauthenticationschemefornetworkcodingwithsupportfor
37
error correction and rogue node identification, Journal of Systems Archi-
tecture 116 (2021) 102051.
[22] T.Lawrence,F.Li,I.Ali,C.R.Haruna,M.Y.Kpiebaareh,T.Christopher,
Acomputationallyefficienthmac-basedauthenticationschemefornetwork
coding, Telecommunication Systems (2021) 1–23.
[23] V. Adat, I. Politis, C. Tselios, P. Galiotos, S. Kotsopoulos, On blockchain
enhancedsecurenetworkcodingfor5gdeployments,in: 2018IEEEGlobal
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[24] K. Lu, Y. Qian, M. Guizani, H.-H. Chen, A framework for a distributed
key management scheme in heterogeneous wireless sensor networks, IEEE
transactions on wireless communications 7 (2) (2008) 639–647.
[25] S. U. Khan, C. Pastrone, L. Lavagno, M. A. Spirito, An energy and
memory-efficient key management scheme for mobile heterogeneous sen-
sor networks, in: 2011 6th International Conference on Risks and Security
of Internet and Systems (CRiSIS), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[26] Y. Tian, Z. Wang, J. Xiong, J. Ma, A blockchain-based secure key man-
agement scheme with trustworthiness in dwsns, IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Informatics 16 (9) (2020) 6193–6202.
[27] M. de Ree, G. Mantas, J. Rodriguez, I. E. Otung, C. Verikoukis, Distant:
Distributedtrustedauthority-basedkeymanagementforbeyond5gwireless
mobile small cells, Computer Communications.
[28] M.DeRee,G.Mantas,A.Radwan,S.Mumtaz,J.Rodriguez,I.E.Otung,
Key management for beyond 5g mobile small cells: A survey, IEEE Access
7 (2019) 59200–59236.
[29] R.Blom,Anoptimalclassofsymmetrickeygenerationsystems,in: Work-
shop on the Theory and Application of of Cryptographic Techniques,
Springer, 1984, pp. 335–338.
38
[30] T. Matsumoto, H. Imai, On the key predistribution system: A practical
solutiontothekeydistributionproblem,in: ConferenceontheTheoryand
Application of Cryptographic Techniques, Springer, 1987, pp. 185–193.
[31] W.Du,J.Deng,Y.S.Han,P.K.Varshney,J.Katz,A.Khalili,Apairwise
keypredistributionschemeforwirelesssensornetworks,ACMTransactions
on Information and System Security (TISSEC) 8 (2) (2005) 228–258.
[32] M. Ramkumar, N. Memon, An efficient key predistribution scheme for ad
hoc network security, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
23 (3) (2005) 611–621.
[33] C. K. Wong, M. Gouda, S. S. Lam, Secure group communications using
key graphs, IEEE/ACM transactions on networking 8 (1) (2000) 16–30.
[34] N. Liu, J. Chen, L. Zhu, J. Zhang, Y. He, A key management scheme for
secure communications of advanced metering infrastructure in smart grid,
IEEE Transactions on Industrial electronics 60 (10) (2012) 4746–4756.
[35] M. Alam, D. Yang, J. Rodriguez, R. A. Abd-Alhameed, Secure device-
to-device communication in lte-a, IEEE Communications Magazine 52 (4)
(2014) 66–73.
[36] X. Gelabert, C. Qvarfordt, M. Costa, P. Kela, K. Leppanen, Uplink ref-
erence signals enabling user-transparent mobility in ultra dense networks,
in: 2016 IEEE 27th Annual IEEE International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications - (PIMRC), 2016.
[37] H. Xu, X. Wang, W. Liu, W. Shao, An uplink basedmobilitymanagement
scheme for 5g wireless network, in: ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[38] Qualcomm, Comparative power analysis between ul and dl-based mobility,
3GPP TSG-RAN WG1 86bis.
[39] Sony, Ul mobility in connected active mode, 3GPP TSG-RAN WG1 88.
39
[40] A. Hakkarainen, J. Werner, M. Costa, K. Leppanen, M. Valkama, High-
efficiencydevicelocalizationin5gultra-densenetworks: Prospectsanden-
abling technologies, in: 2015 IEEE 82nd Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2015-Fall), IEEE, pp. 1–5. doi:10.1109/VTCFall.2015.7390965.
URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7390965/
[41] S. Underwood, Blockchain beyond bitcoin (2016).
[42] V. Adat, I. Politis, C. Tselios, S. Kotsopoulos, Blockchain enhanced se-
cret small cells for the 5g environment, in: 2019 IEEE 24th International
Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication
LinksandNetworks(CAMAD),2019,pp.1–6. doi:10.1109/CAMAD.2019.
8858457.
[43] G. BigchainDB GmbH, Berlin, Bigchaindb 2.0 : The blockchain database,
BigchainDB white paper (2018) 1–14.
[44] M. Tayyab, X. Gelabert, R. J¨antti, A simulation study on handover in
lte ultra-small cell deployment: A 5g challenge, IEEE 5G World Forum
Conference, Dresden, Germany.
[45] V.Sharma,I.You,F.Palmieri,D.N.K.Jayakody,J.Li,Secureandenergy-
efficienthandoverinfognetworksusingblockchain-baseddmm,IEEECom-
munications Magazine 56 (5) (2018) 22–31.
40
