IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 1
Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks via
Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
Yixin Liu, Zhao Li, Shirui Pan, Member, IEEE, Chen Gong, Member, IEEE,
Chuan Zhou, George Karypis, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Anomaly detection on attributed networks attracts to large networks flexibly. Experimental results show that our
considerable research interests due to wide applications of proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art baseline
attributed networks in modeling a wide range of complex methods on all seven benchmark datasets.
systems. Recently, the deep learning-based anomaly detection
IndexTerms—Unsupervisedlearning,Graphneuralnetworks,
methods have shown promising results over shallow approaches,
Contrastive self-supervised learning, Anomaly detection, At-
especially on networks with high-dimensional attributes and
tributed networks.
complexstructures.However,existingapproaches,whichemploy
graph autoencoder as their backbone, do not fully exploit
the rich information of the network, resulting in suboptimal I. INTRODUCTION
performance. Furthermore, these methods do not directly target
ATTRIBUTED networks (a.k.a. attributed graphs), where
anomaly detection in their learning objective and fail to scale
to large networks due to the full graph training mechanism. To nodes with attributes indicate real-world entities and
overcome these limitations, in this paper, we present a novel links indicate the relationship between entities, are ubiquitous
Contrastive self-supervised Learning framework for Anomaly in various scenarios, including finance (trading networks) [1],
detection on attributed networks (CoLA for abbreviation). Our
socialmedia(socialnetworks)[2],[3],ande-commerce(item-
framework fully exploits the local information from network
user networks) [4], [5]. To utilize attributed network data to
data by sampling a novel type of contrastive instance pair,
which can capture the relationship between each node and its solvepracticalproblems,awidevarietyofgraphanalysistasks
neighboring substructure in an unsupervised way. Meanwhile, a have attracted significant research interests in recent years,
well-designed graph neural network-based contrastive learning such as node classification [6], [7], graph classification [8],
model is proposed to learn informative embedding from high- [9],andlinkprediction[10],[11].Amongthesetasks,anomaly
dimensional attributes and local structure and measure the
detection task on attributed networks is a vital research prob-
agreement of each instance pairs with its outputted scores. The
multi-round predicted scores by the contrastive learning model lem. Aiming to detect the instances that significantly deviate
are further used to evaluate the abnormality of each node with from the majority of instances [12] (in attributed networks,
statisticalestimation.Inthisway,thelearningmodelistrainedby thedatainstancesarenodesgenerally),anomalydetectionhas
aspecificanomalydetection-awaretarget.Furthermore,sincethe
significant implications in many security-related applications,
inputofthegraphneuralnetworkmoduleisbatchesofinstance
e.g., fraud detection and social spam detection [13].
pairs instead of the full network, our framework can adapt
However, detecting anomalies effectively on attributed net-
Manuscript received November 30, 2020; revised February 26, 2021; works is not trivial due to the diversity of anomalies and the
accepted March 19, 2021. This work was supported in part by the National lack of supervision. Since attributed networks have both at-
Natural Science Foundation (NSF) of China under Grant 61973162 and
tributeinformationaswellasstructuralinformation,theyusu-
Grant61872360,inpartbytheFundamentalResearchFundsfortheCentral
Universities under Grant 30920032202, in part by the China Computer allycontaindifferenttypesofanomalies.Figure1providesan
Federation (CCF)-Tencent Open Fund under Grant RAGR20200101, and in example to illustrate two basic types of anomalies: structural
partbytheHongKongScholarsProgramunderGrantXJ2019036.(YixinLiu
anomaly and contextual anomaly. The attribute information
andZhaoLicontributedequallytothiswork.)(Correspondingauthor:Shirui
Pan.) of the structural anomalies is often normal, while they have
YixinLiuandShiruiPanarewiththeDepartmentofDataScienceandAI, several abnormal links to other nodes. The contextual anoma-
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800,
lies, differently, have natural neighboring structures but their
Australia(e-mail:yixin.liu@monash.edu;shirui.pan@monash.edu).
Zhao Li is with the Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 310000, China (e-mail: attributes are corrupted (noisy or entirely different from all
lizhao.lz@alibaba-inc.com). neighbors). Such diversity makes it difficult to apply anomaly
Chen Gong is with the PCA Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Intelligent
detectionmethodsforattribute-onlydata(e.g.,OC-SVM[14])
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of
Education,SchoolofComputerScienceandEngineering,NanjingUniversity or plain networks (e.g., LOF [15]) to attributed networks
of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China, and also with the directly. Therefore, an efficient anomaly detection approach
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
should consider multiple patterns of anomalies. Moreover,
Kong(e-mail:chen.gong@njust.edu.cn).
Chuan Zhou is with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Sci- resulting from the prohibitive cost for accessing ground-truth
ence, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China (e-mail: labels of anomalies, anomaly detection on attributed networks
zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn).
is predominately carried out in an unsupervised manner [13],
George Karypis is with the Department of Computer Science and En-
gineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: [16]. That is to say, the algorithm has to conclude the normal
karypis@umn.edu). pattern of data from the corrupted networks without supervi-
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
sion. Hence, a key is to fully and reasonably exploit existing
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3068344.
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3068344 information from attributed network data.
1202
yaM
6
]GL.sc[
2v31100.3012:viXra
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 2
Recently, various methods have been proposed to deal
UK US
with the anomaly detection task for attributed networks. The Male Female
Manager Engineer
shallow methods, including AMEN [16], Radar [17] and Vodafone Google
ANOMALOUS [18], leverage shallow learning mechanisms Germany US US India
Female Male Male Male
(e.g. ego-network analysis, residual analysis or CUR decom- Designer Engineer Engineer Driver
VW Google Google IBM
position) to detect anomalies. Unfortunately, these models US Structural US Contextual
cannotfullyaddressthecomputationalchallengeonattributed Male Anomaly Male Anomaly
Engineer Engineer
networksandfailtocapturethecomplexinteractionsbetween Google Google
different information modalities due to limitations of shallow (a) StructuralAnomaly (b) ContextualAnomaly
mechanisms, especially when the feature is high-dimensional
Fig. 1. Toy examples to illustrate different types of anomalies in attributed
[13]. With the rocketing growth of deep learning for anomaly
networks.Astructuralanomalyoftenhaswronglinkswithothernodesbuthas
detection [12], [19], [20], [21], researchers also present deep normalattributes.Forexample,inSubfigure(a),anAmericanengineerhasa
neuralnetworks-basedmethodstosolvetheanomalydetection verylowprobabilityofbeingassociatedwithaGermandesigneraswellas
a British manager, so the links between them are abnormal. A contextual
problem on attributed networks. DOMINANT [13] is one of
anomaly usually has a natural neighboring structure but its attributes are
the representative methods. It constructs a graph autoencoder corrupted.Forinstance,inSubfigure(b),theattributevectoroftheanomaly
to reconstruct the attribute and structure information simul- nodeisdisturbedbynoisyinformation,e.g.,mismatchedlocation,employer
andoccupation.
taneously, and the abnormality is evaluated by reconstruction
error.SpecAE[22]alsoleveragesgraphautoencodertoextract
low-dimensional embedding, and carries out detection via
1, the structural anomaly has individual abnormal links with
density estimation.
uncorrelated nodes, which is partial inconsistency; the con-
Although existing deep learning-based methods [13], [22]
textual anomaly, differently, has mismatched attributes with
have achieved considerable performance for anomaly detec-
all neighbors. Contrastive learning, naturally, is capable to
tion on graphs, they still have several shortcomings, largely
learn the matching patterns and capture various mismatching
attributed to the autoencoder backbone in their architectures.
patterns via its intrinsic discriminative mechanism. Second,
First, autoencoders aim to learn the latent representation
contrastive learning models provide a specific predicted score
by reconstructing the original data instead of detecting the
to measure the agreement between the elements in each
anomaly itself. Although the anomaly scores can be com-
instancepair,andthescaleishighlyrelatedtotheabnormality
puted according to reconstruction errors [13], this kind of
of instance. Since anomaly detection methods usually output
methods can only achieve suboptimal performance due to the
a list of scores or a ranking to represent the abnormality of
fact that they do not target directly the anomaly detection
each node, the predicted scores of contrastive learning model
objective. Second, autoencoder-based methods may not able
can be utilized for anomaly detection directly. In this way, we
tofullyexploittherichinformationoftheattributedgraphfor
can train the model via an objective that is highly relevant to
effective graph representation learning. Specifically, autoen-
anomaly detection.
coders simply rebuild the original data and they do not have
Inthispaper,weproposeanovelContrastiveself-supervised
any refinement for data. However, recent works [23], [24],
Learning framework for Anomaly detection on attributed
[25] have shown that more useful information can be mined
networks (CoLA for abbreviation). By sampling the well-
in an unsupervised way if we design certain pretext tasks
designed instance pairs from the full network and using them
carefully based on augmented data. Third, graph autoencoder
to train the contrastive learning model, the information of
is the bottleneck to carry out anomaly detection on large-
networkisexploitedbetter.Concretely,ourframeworkfocuses
scale networks. Generally, the graph convolution operation
onmodelingtherelationshipbetweeneachnodeanditspartial
in graph autoencoder needs to input and reconstruct the full
neighboringsubstructure,whichcanexposethevarioustypeof
networked data, which is unfeasible due to the explosive
anomalieswithinnetworks.Meanwhile,ourCoLAframework
memory requirements when the network is large.
is trained with a direct target to assist the anomaly detection
As an alternative unsupervised learning technique, self-
task.Wesetthelearningobjectiveofourmodeltodiscriminate
supervised contrastive learning is a promising solution to
the agreement between the elements within the instance pairs,
addresstheaforementionedlimitations.Bylearningtocontrast
andtheresultscanbefurtherusedtoevaluatetheabnormality
theelaborateinstancepairs,themodelcanacquireinformative
of nodes. Besides, by splitting the network into separated
knowledge without manual labels. Contrastive self-supervised
lightweightinstancepairs,ouranomalydetectionframeworkis
learning has nice properties for anomaly detection task. First,
compatible with large-scale networks. Specifically, our frame-
contrastive learning mainly studies the matching of pairs of
workdoesnotneedtorungraphconvolutiononfullnetworks,
instances, which offers helpful information for anomaly de-
so it successfully avoids the memory explosion problem. To
tection. For the normal instance in graphs, there is a potential
summarize, the main contributions are as follows:
matching pattern between each node and its neighbors, e.g.,
the homophily hypothesis. The anomalies, on the opposite, • We propose a contrastive self-supervised learning frame-
often present when there is an inconsistency/mismatch be- work, CoLA, for the anomaly detection problem on
tween attributes and structure, which violates the original attributed networks. To the best of our knowledge, this is
matching pattern of networks. Moreover, different types of thefirstcontrastiveself-supervisedlearning-basedmethod
anomalies have different manners of mismatching: in Figure for graph anomaly detection.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 3
• We present a novel type of contrastive instance pair, our framework can be set to any type of the aforementioned
“target node v.s. local subgraph”, for attributed networks GNNs.
to adapt to the anomaly detection task, which efficiently
captures the local information of a node and its neigh- B. Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
boring substructure.
Anomaly detection on attributed networks attracts consid-
• We design a contrastive learning model to learn the rep-
erable research interest in recent years due to the wide ap-
resentative information from the node-subgraph instance
plication of attributed networks in modeling complex systems
pairs and provide discriminative scores for abnormality
[12].AMEN[16]detectsanomaliesbyleveragingego-network
ranking.Theproposedlearningmodelisfriendlytolarge-
information of each node on attributed networks. Radar [17]
scale networked data.
characterizes the residuals of attribute information and its
• We conduct extensive experiments on various datasets to
coherence with network information for anomaly detection.
demonstratetheeffectivenessofCoLAanditssuperiority
Further,ANOMALOUS[18]jointlyconsidersCURdecompo-
compared with a range of baseline methods.
sitionandresidualanalysisforanomalydetectiononattributed
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
networks. Zhu et al. [49] present a joint learning model
II, we first review the related works. Then, the preliminary
to detect mixed anomaly by core initiating and expanding.
definitionsandnotationsareintroducedinSectionIII.Section
Despite their success on low-dimensional attributed network
IV illustrates the overall pipeline and the components of our
data,thesemethodscannotworkwellwhenthenetworkshave
framework in detail. After that, we analyze the experimental
complex structures and high-dimensional attributes due to the
results in Section V and then conclude our work in section
limitation of their shallow mechanisms.
VI.
With the rocketing growth of the deep learning technique
[29], several deep approaches are presented to solve the
II. RELATEDWORK
anomaly detection problem for attributed networks. DOMI-
Inthissection,weintroducethemostrelatedwork:network NANT [13] constructs an autoencoder with GCN layers to
embedding and graph neural networks, anomaly detection on reconstruct both the attribute matrix and adjacency matrix. It
attributed networks, and contrastive learning. defines the anomaly score of node as the weighted sum of its
reconstruction errors of attribute and structure. SpecAE [22]
A. Network Embedding and Graph Neural Networks leverages a spectral graph autoencoder to extract the latent
embedding of each node and uses Gaussian Mixture Model
Networkembeddingaimstoembednodesintolatentvector
(GMM) to perform the detection. For dynamic networks,
spaces, where the inherent properties of the graph are pre-
NetWalk[50]learnsdynamicallynetworkrepresentationswith
served. For attributed network, the learned embedding should
random walk sampling and autoencoder model, and detects
containbothstructuralandsemanticinformation.Forinstance,
anomalies with a clustering-based detector.
SNE[26]employsneuralnetworkstomodeltheinterrelations
Theabovedeepmethodsachievesuperiorperformanceover
between structure and attribute. TriDNR [27] jointly learns
theshallowmethodsbyintroducingdeepneuralnetworks,but
node embedding via tri-party information sources including
also have several shortcomings caused by their reconstruction
node’s structure, attributes and labels. NETTENTION [28]
mechanism with autoencoders. Firstly, reconstruction is a
leverages adversarial training mechanism and self-attention
naiveunsupervisedlearningsolutionthatfailstomakefulluse
module to learn informative node embeddings.
of data. On contrary, CoLA better utilizes the attribute and
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a family of deep
structure information in a self-supervised manner. Secondly,
neuralnetworks[29]formodelingtheunderlyingrelationships
their reconstructive optimization target is not associated with
of non-Euclidean networks/graphs data [30]. The concept
anomaly detection. In contrast to them, our learning objective
of GNN was firstly outlined in [31]. After that, a series
istodiscriminatetheagreementbetweennodesandsubgraphs,
of spectral-based GNNs is proposed [32], [33], [34], which
which can indicate the abnormality of nodes directly. Thirdly,
employsfiltersfromtheperspectiveofgraphsignalprocessing
these methods require full adjacency and attribute matrix as
[35]. GCN [6] performs a localized first-order approximation
model’s input, which makes these algorithms unable to be
of spectral graph convolutions to learn node representation
run on large-sized network data due to the explosive memory
efficiently.GAT[7]introducestheattentionmechanism[36]to
requirements. In contrast, our framework learns with sampled
aggregateneighbors’informationwithadaptiveweights.Some
instance pairs rather than the full network, which makes it
recent works try to improve GNNs in different directions,
flexibly adapt to large-scale networks.
such as simplifying the computational complexity [37], [38],
training with adversarial scheme [39], applying to large-scale
C. Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
graphs [40], [41], [42], and introducing novel operators [8],
[43]. Currently, GNNs have been applied to various research Contrastive self-supervised learning is a significant brunch
fields, such as time-series prediction [44], [45], hyperspectral of self-supervised learning [51]. Through handcrafted con-
image classification [46] and knowledge graph [47], [48]. trastive pretext tasks, these approaches learn representations
In our proposed CoLA, GNN is a significant component bycontrastingpositiveinstancepairsagainstnegativeinstance
of the contrastive learning model. We select GCN as the pairs [24]. Deep InfoMax [25] learns the embedding of im-
backbone of our GNN module. Flexibly, the GNN module in ages by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 4
a local patch and its global context. As a follower, CPC TABLEI
[23] applies contrastive learning to speech recognition by NOTATIONSANDEXPLANATIONSRELATEDTOCOLAFRAMEWORK.THE
FOURBLOCKSOFTHETABLE(FROMTOPTOBOTTOM)SHOWTHE
maximizing the association between a segment of audio and
NOTATIONOFVARIABLESABOUTATTRIBUTEDNETWORKS,CONTRASTIVE
itscontext audio. MoCo[52] constructsa momentumencoder LEARNING,GNN,ANDCOLA’SHYPER-PARAMETERSRESPECTIVELY.
with a momentum-updated encoder to generate contrastive
embedding. SimCLR [24] leverages different combinations Notation Explanation
of augmentation methods to build pair-wise samples. More G=(V,E,X) A weighted attributed network
recently, BYOL [53] presents to contrast the representation of V The node set of G
online network with target network, where the two networks E The edge set of G
are learned mutually. Simsiam [54] adopts Siamese networks X∈R𝑛×𝑓 The attribute matrix of G
A∈R𝑛×𝑛 The adjacency matrix of G
tolearnvisualrepresentationlearninginacontrastivemanner.
x𝑖 ∈R𝑓 The attribute vector of the𝑖𝑡ℎ node in G
Some recent works also exploit contrastive methods to 𝑛 The number of nodes in G
graphlearning.DGI[55]considersanode’srepresentationand 𝑓 The dimension of attributes in G
graph-level summary vector obtained by a readout function 𝑘 𝑖 The anomaly score of the𝑖𝑡ℎ node in G
as a contrastive instance pair, and generates negative samples 𝑃 𝑖 =(𝑣 𝑖 ,G𝑖 ,𝑦 𝑖) A contrastive instance pair with index𝑖
with graph corruption. On the basis of DGI, Hassani et al. 𝑣 𝑖 The target node of instance pair 𝑃 𝑖
[56] suggest a multi-view contrastive learning framework by G𝑖 The local subgraph of instance pair 𝑃 𝑖
viewing the original graph structure and graph diffusion [43] 𝑦 𝑖 ∈{0,1} The label of instance pair 𝑃 𝑖
astwodifferentviews.GCC[57]pre-trainsGNNforuniverse
A𝑖 ∈R𝑐×𝑐 The adjacency matrix of G𝑖
graph data by sampling two subgraphs for each node as a H
𝑖
(ℓ) ∈R𝑐×𝑑(ℓ) The hidden representation matrix of G𝑖
positive instance pair and uses InfoNCE loss [23] to learn. outputtedbytheℓ𝑡ℎ layerofGNNmodule
GMI[58]considersmaximizingtheagreementbetweennode’s z 𝑖 (ℓ) ∈R𝑑(ℓ) The hidden representation vector of 𝑣 𝑖
embedding and raw features of its neighbors as well as which
outputtedbytheℓ𝑡ℎ
layerofGNNmodule
between embedding of two adjacent nodes. E𝑖 ∈R𝑐×𝑑 The embedding matrix of the nodes in G𝑖
However, most of these works aim to learn data represen- e 𝑙 𝑖 𝑔 ∈R𝑑 The embedding vector of G𝑖
tation instead of detecting anomalies. To adapt to anomaly e 𝑖 𝑡𝑛 ∈R𝑑 The embedding vector of 𝑣 𝑖
detection, our proposed CoLA framework has essential dif- 𝑠 𝑖 The predicted score of 𝑃 𝑖
W(ℓ) ∈ The learnable parameter of the ℓ𝑡ℎ layer
ferences in both motivation and implementation compared R𝑑(ℓ−1)×𝑑(ℓ)
of GNN module
with the aforementioned approaches. From the perspective of W(𝑑) ∈R𝑑×𝑑
The learnable parameter of discriminator
motivation,theseapproachesonlytaketheembeddingmodule
module
of contrastive models as an encoder, and the discriminator
𝑅 Thesamplingroundstocalculateanomaly
module becomes useless when testing. Our proposed CoLA,
scores
in contrast, leverages the whole contrastive model to compute 𝑐 The number of nodes within the local
the anomaly scores for each node. From the perspective of subgraphs
implementation, since the existing instance pair definition 𝑑 The dimension of embedding
cannoteffectivelycapturetheabnormalityofnodes,wedesign
a novel type of contrastive instance pair for graph contrastive
learning, which pays close attention to the local information
With the aforementioned notations, the anomaly detection
of each node rather than the global property.
problem on attributed network can be formally stated as a
ranking problem:
III. PROBLEMFORMULATION
Definition 2. Anomaly Detection on Attributed networks.
Given an attributed network G = (V,E,X) with nodes
In this paper, we use bold lowercase letters (e.g. x), bold
uppercase letters (e.g. X), and calligraphic fonts (e.g. V) to
𝑣
1
,...,𝑣 𝑛, the goal is to learn an anomaly score function
denote vectors, matrices and sets, respectively. Accordingly, f to calculate the anomaly score 𝑘 𝑖 = f(𝑣 𝑖) of each node.
the definition of attributed networks is given as follows: Theanomalyscore 𝑘 𝑖 canrepresentthedegreeofabnormality
of node 𝑣 𝑖. By ranking all the nodes with their anomaly
Definition 1. Attributed networks. An attributed network can scores, the anomaly nodes can be detected according to their
be denoted as G = (V,E,X), where V = {𝑣 1 ,...,𝑣 𝑛} is the positions.
set of nodes (|V| = 𝑛), E is the set of edges (|E| = 𝑚), and
X∈R𝑛×𝑓 is the attribute matrix. The 𝑖𝑡ℎ row vector x𝑖 ∈R𝑓 In this paper, we consider the setting of unsupervised
of the attribute matrix denotes the attribute information of the anomalydetection,whichisgenerallyadoptedbytheprevious
𝑖𝑡ℎ node. An binary adjacency matrix A ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 is employed works [13], [17], [18]. In this setting, only the attributed
to denote the structure information of the attributed network, network G that contains anomaly nodes is given, and neither
where A𝑖,𝑗 = 1 if there is a link between nodes 𝑣 𝑖 and 𝑣 𝑗, the category label nor the abnormality label of the nodes is
otherwise A𝑖,𝑗 =0. Since the information of V and E is both given in the training phase.
contain by A, an attributed network can also be denoted as For the convenience of the reader, the notations used in the
G = (A,X). paper are summarized in Table I.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 5
IV. METHODOLOGY node. For positive instance pairs, the initial node is set as the
target node, then the sampled subgraph is composed of the
In this section, we describe the general framework of
neighbornodesofthetargetnode.Fornegativeinstancepairs,
our proposed CoLA, as shown in Figure 2. CoLA on the
the initial node is randomly selected from all nodes except
highest level consists of three components, namely instance
the target node. As a result, there is mismatching between the
pair sampling, GNN-based contrastive learning model, and
target node and the local subgraph in negative pairs.
anomaly score computation. At first, to generate the basic
The main motivation for such design is that the anomalies
learning samples for contrastive self-supervised learning, we
in attributed networks are usually reflected in the inconsis-
execute instance pair sampling to sample the well-designed
tency between node and its local neighbors, while the global
“target node v.s. local subgraph” instance pairs with a local
informationisoftenindependentofanomalies.Asisshownin
substructure-based sampling strategy. Our designed instance
Figure 1, both types of anomaly nodes have a mismatch with
pairs can take full advantage of the original data by paying
theirnearneighbors.Ourdesignpurposefullyfocusesonpick-
closeattentiontoeachnodeanditslocalneighbors.Afterthat,
ing out such mismatch by learning the “node-local subgraph”
the GNN-based contrastive learning model extracts the low-
matching pattern. Differently, the existing works (e.g. DGI
dimensional embeddings for target node and local subgraph
[55]) mainly consider the global property of nodes, which is
with the GNN and readout module and then calculates a dis-
helpfulfornetworkembeddingbuthasaminorcontributionon
criminative score for each instance pair with a discriminator.
detecting anomalies. The comparison experiments in Section
The predicted score that evaluates the agreement between the
V-C illustrates that our designed instance pair is critical to
target node and subgraph can further indicate the abnormality
capture anomaly.
of the corresponding target node. As such, the training of the
As shown in Figure 3, a simple sketch map is used to
model is guided by an objective that relates to the anomaly
demonstrate the sampling process of our proposed contrastive
detection task. The final step, anomaly score computation,
instance pairs. The sampling follows four steps: target node
is to measure the abnormalities of all nodes with anomaly
selection, subgraph sampling, anonymization, and combining
scores, so we can pick the anomalies out by ranking the
into instance pair.
scores. Specifically, the anomaly scores for each node are
calculated by the predicted scores of positive/negative pairs (1) Target node selection. A single target node needs to be
which are acquired by multi-round sampling. The detection specified first. In practice, we traverse each node in the
results can be regarded as an expectation of multiple times of graphasthetargetnodeinrandomorderwithinanepoch.
observation for the compatibility between each node and its Therefore, the target node selection can be viewed as a
local substructure. In the rest of this section, we introduce the stochastic sampling without replacement.
threemaincomponentsofourframeworkindetail(Subsection (2) Subgraph sampling. A local subgraph is defined as
IV-A to IV-C). Then we describe the overall pipeline and the adjacent substructure near an initial node. As we
algorithm of CoLA in Subsection IV-D. In Subsection IV-E, mentionedabove,wesamplethesubgraphforpositivepair
the time complexity of our framework is analyzed. and negative pair by setting the initial node as the target
node and a randomly sampled node respectively. Inspired
by [57], we adopt random walk with restart (RWR) [59]
A. Contrastive Instance Pair Definition
as local subgraph sampling strategy due to its usability
The success of contrastive learning frameworks largely and efficiency. Other graph sampling algorithms such as
relies on the definition of the contrastive instance pair. Unlike forest fire [60] are also available in our framework.
computer vision or natural language processing tasks where (3) Anonymization. The purpose of anonymization is to
an instance can be defined as an image or a sentence straight- prevent the contrastive learning model from easily iden-
forwardly, the instance definition in graphs is not so clear as tifying the existence of target nodes in local subgraphs.
well [57]. Some previous works have defined different types Concretely,wesettheattributevectorsoftheinitialnodes
of instance pair in graphs, such as “full graph v.s. node” [55], intozerovectors.Assuch,theinformationoftargetnodes
“large subgraph v.s. node” [56] and “subgraph v.s. subgraph” is hidden.
[57]. However, none of them is designed or optimized for the (4) Combining into instance pair. The final step is to com-
anomaly detection task. Since the abnormality of a node is bine the target node and relevant subgraphs into instance
usually related to the relationship between the node itself and pairs. After combination, the positive pair and negative
its neighboring structure, we should design a novel type of pairaresavedtocorrespondingsamplepoolsrespectively.
contrastive instance pair to capture such local property.
To model the local distribution pattern of nodes in a B. GNN-based Contrastive Learning Model
network, our definition of contrastive instance pair focuses on
ThesampledinstancepairsareusedtotraintheGNN-based
therelationshipbetweenanodeanditsenclosingsubstructure.
contrastive learning model. For instance pair 𝑃 𝑖 with its label,
Specifically, we design a “target node v.s. local subgraph”
the containing data can be denoted as:
instance pair for anomaly detection on attributed networks.
The first element of the instance pair is a single node, which
𝑃 𝑖 = (𝑣 𝑖 ,G𝑖 ,𝑦 𝑖), (1)
isnamed“targetnode”inourframework.Thetargetnodecan
be set as any node in the network. The second element of the where 𝑣 𝑖 is the target node whose attribute vector is x𝑣𝑖 , G𝑖
instance pair is a local subgraph that sampled from an initial is the local subgraph which can be denoted as:
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 6
FullGraph
1 : 0.05
1 2 3 4 5 2 2 : 0.12
Example
6 7 8 9 Local 7 Subg 8 raph Readout ! " '( 3 : 0.57
+ " & " …
10 11 12 13 Predicted
Score of 6 : 0.07
PositivePairs
Positive Negative …
InstancePair InstancePair 6 % %
Sampling Sampling Target Node ! " #$ 11 : 0.03
, " GNN Discriminator Predicted 12 : 0.12
( 6 , 2 ) ( 6 , 4 5 ) Score of
7 8 9 0 BCE Loss NegativePairs 13 : 0.11
… … 1 0.912
* )
PositivePairPool NegativePairPool " "
InstancePairSampling GNN-basedContrastiveLearningModel AnomalyScoreComputation
Fig.2. TheoverallframeworkofCoLA.Theframeworkiscomposedofthreecomponents:instancepairsampling,GNN-basedcontrastivelearningmodel,
andanomalyscorecomputation.Hereweassumenode 𝑣 3 isananomalysinceithascorruptedattributes,andtherestnodesarenormalnodes.Wetakethe
abnormalityestimationfornode 𝑣 6 asanexample.Firstofall,multiplepositiveandnegativeinstancepairsaresampled,where 𝑣 6 isthetargetnode.After
that, the GNN-based contrastive learning model evaluates the predicted score for each instance pair. Finally, the anomaly score of 𝑣 6 is estimated by the
statisticalestimationofpredictedscoresofpositive/negativepairs.
FullGraph
G𝑖 = (A𝑖 ,X𝑖), (2)
1 Example 2 3 4 5 and 𝑦 𝑖 is the label of 𝑃 𝑖 which can be denoted as:
(cid:40)
6 7 8 9 1, 𝑃 𝑖 is a positive instance pair
𝑦 𝑖 = . (3)
0, 𝑃 𝑖 is a negative instance pair
10 11 12 13
As is demonstrated in the middle part of Figure 2, our
Target Node proposed GNN-based contrastive learning model is composed
Selection ofthreemaincomponents:GNNmodule,readoutmodule,and
discriminator module.
Positive 6 Negative 1) GNNmodule: ThetargetoftheGNNmoduleistoaggre-
Subgraph Subgraph
gate the information between nodes in the local subgraph and
Sampling Sampling
transferthehigh-dimensionalattributesintoalow-dimensional
embedding space. The local subgraph G𝑖 is fed into a GNN
2 4 5
with multiple stacked layers, where a single layer can be
written as:
6 7 8 8 9
H
𝑖
(ℓ) =𝐺𝑁𝑁(A𝑖 ,H
𝑖
(ℓ−1) ;𝑊(𝑙−1)), (4)
Anonymization
where H
(ℓ−1)
an H
(ℓ)
is the hidden representation matrices
𝑖 𝑖
learned by the (ℓ−1)-th layer and ℓ-th layer respectively, and
2 4 5 𝑊(ℓ−1) is the learnable parameter set of the (ℓ−1)-th layer.
With a 𝐿-layer GNN, the input representation H (0) is defined
7 8 9 𝑖
(𝐿)
as the attribute matrix X𝑖, and the output representation H
𝑖
is the embeddings of subgraph nodes which is denoted as E𝑖.
Combining into
𝐺𝑁𝑁(·) can be set to any type of mainstream GNNs, such
instance pair
as GCN [6], GAT [7] or GIN [8]. In practice, we adopt GCN
2 4 5 duetoitshighefficiency.ThenEquation(4)canbespecifically
( 6 , ) ( 6 , )
7 8 9 written as:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
SavingtoPositive SavingtoNegative H 𝑖 (ℓ) = 𝜙 D(cid:101)𝑖 − 2 1 A(cid:101)𝑖D(cid:101) − 𝑖 1 2H 𝑖 (ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) , (5)
PairPool PairPool
where A(cid:101)𝑖 =A𝑖+I is the subgraph adjacency matrix with self-
a F n r o i e g d . e m 3 𝑣 . a 6 rk a T e s h d t e he i s n a ex m g a r p m e l e i p n n l g . e T o p f r h o t e a c r e b g s l e s u t e o n - f o w d c h e o i . t n e T tr h a s e s tr t i i i n v p i e e tia i m n l s e n t a o a n n d s c e e s th f p o e a r ir s e s u m . b b H g e r e d a r p d e h in w s g a e m o s f p e l l i t e n h c g e t R lo 𝑑 o ( p ℓ− , 1) D(cid:101) ×𝑑 𝑖 (ℓ i ) s is th t e he de w g e re ig e h m t m at a ri t x rix of of lo t c h a e l ( s ℓ u − bg 1 ra )- p t h h , la W ye (ℓ r, −1 𝜙 ) (· ∈ )
correspondingnodeismaskedwithzerovector. is the activation function such as ReLU.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 7
In order to contrast them in the same feature space, besides
𝑁
the nodes in local subgraph, the target node should also be ∑︁
mapped to the same embedding space. Since there is no
L =− 𝑦 𝑖log(𝑠 𝑖)+(1−𝑦 𝑖)log(1−𝑠 𝑖)
structure information with a single node, we only employ the
𝑖=1
𝑁 (10)
weightmatricesofGCNandcorrespondingactivationfunction =− ∑︁ 𝑦 𝑖log(𝐶𝐿𝑀(𝑣 𝑖 ,G𝑖))+
totransformtheattributesofthetargetnode.Concretely,such
𝑖=1
transformation can be viewed as a DNN:
(1−𝑦 𝑖)log(1−𝐶𝐿𝑀(𝑣
𝑖
,G𝑖)).
z (ℓ) = 𝜙 (cid:16) z (ℓ−1) W(ℓ−1) (cid:17) , (6) It should be noted that different from the softplus version
𝑖 𝑖
BCEin[25]andthelabel-balancedversionBCEin[55],[56],
avanillaBCEisutilizedhere.Thereasonisthatweexecutea
wherez
(ℓ−1)
andz
(ℓ)
arethehiddenrepresentationrowvectors
𝑖 𝑖 balanced sampling when we sample the positive and negative
for target node that learned by the (ℓ −1)-th layer and ℓ-th
instance pairs. To adapt to more complex sampling strategies
layerrespectively,andW(ℓ−1)
istheweightmatrixsharedwith
in further research, corresponding objective functions are also
GCN. The input z
(0)
is defined as the attribute row vector
𝑖 alternative in our framework.
of target node x𝑣𝑖 , and the output is marked as target node
embedding
e𝑡𝑛
.
𝑖
C. Anomaly Score Computation
2) Readoutmodule: Thetargetofourreadoutmoduleisto
transfer the embeddings of nodes in subgraph E𝑖 into a local After the contrastive learning model is well trained, we
𝑙𝑔
subgraph embedding vector e . For simplification, we use acquire a classifier to discriminate the agreement between
𝑖
the average pooling function as our readout function, which substructures and nodes. An ideal GNN model with an appro-
has been widely used in previous works [56]. Specifically, the priate numberof parameters wouldtend to learnthe matching
readout function is written as follows: patternofnormalsamplessincetheyoccupythevastmajority
of the training data. For the anomalies, it is much harder to
e 𝑙 𝑖 𝑔 = 𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑢𝑡(E𝑖) = ∑︁ 𝑛𝑖 (E 𝑛 𝑖) 𝑘, (7) fi id t ea th l e c ir on p d a i t t t i e o r n n s, d f u o e r t a o n i o ts rm ir a r l eg n u o l d a e ri , ty th a e nd pre d d iv ic e t r e s d ity s . co U r n e d o er f
𝑖
𝑘=1 its positive pair 𝑠(+) should be close to 1, while the negative
where (E𝑖) 𝑘 is the 𝑘-th row of E𝑖, and 𝑛 𝑖 is the number of one 𝑠(−) should be close to 0. For an anomalous node, the
predictedscoresofitspositiveandnegativepairswouldbeless
nodes of the local subgraph G𝑖.
discriminative (close to 0.5) because the model cannot well
3) Discriminator module: The discriminator module is the
distinguish its matching pattern. Based on the above property,
corecomponentofourcontrastivelearningmodel.Itcontrasts
for each node 𝑣 𝑖, we can simply define the anomaly score as
the embeddings of the two elements in an instance pair and
the difference value between its negative and positive score:
outputs the final predicted score. Here, we apply a simple
bilinearscoringfunction,whichisalsoemployedby[23].The
predicted score can be calculated by:
𝑓(𝑣 𝑖) = 𝑠
𝑖
(−) −𝑠
𝑖
(+). (11)
However,asampledlocalsubgraphcanonlybeviewedasa
𝑠 𝑖 = 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟(e 𝑙 𝑖 𝑔,e 𝑖 𝑡𝑛) =𝜎 (cid:16) e 𝑙 𝑖 𝑔 W(𝑑)e 𝑖 𝑡𝑛(cid:62) (cid:17) , (8) p w a h r i t c ia h l c o a b n s n e o rv t a r t e i p o r n es o e f n t t h t e he ta w rg h e o t le no n d e e i ’ g s h n b e o i r g d h i b s o tr r i i b n u g ti s o t n ru o c f tu t r h e e ,
targetnode.Incompleteobservationwillleadtoanincomplete
where W(𝑑) is the weight matrix of discriminator, and 𝜎(·) is perception of abnormality, which will affect the performance
the logistic sigmoid function. of anomaly detection. For example, some structural anomaly
4) Objective function: By integrating the aforementioned nodeshaveseveralabnormallinkstouncorrelatednodes,while
threecomponents,ourproposedGNN-basedcontrastivelearn- most of their neighbors are normal. Then, if we only estimate
ing model can be considered as a binary classification model the abnormality with one-shot sampling, once the normal
to predict the labels of contrastive instance pairs: neighborsaresampledasthelocalsubgraph,suchabnormality
will be ignored.
𝑠 𝑖 =𝐶𝐿𝑀(𝑣 𝑖 ,G𝑖), (9) To solve this problem, we propose to use the predicted
scores of multi-round and positive-negative sampling to gen-
where 𝐶𝐿𝑀(·) is the contrastive learning model. erate anomaly scores. Specifically, for each node 𝑣 𝑖 in the
Here, our objective is to make the predicted 𝑠 𝑖 and the
attributednetwork,wesample𝑅positiveinstancepairsaswell
ground-truth label 𝑦 𝑖 as close as possible. Therefore, we as 𝑅 negative instance pairs via the sampling strategy intro-
duced in Subsection IV-A, and 𝑅 is the number of sampling
adopt a standard binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss, which is
round. These instance pairs are denoted as
(𝑃(+),··· ,𝑃(+))
a common choice for binary classification problems, as our 𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅
objective function. Its utility has been validated by other and
(𝑃(−),··· ,𝑃(−))
respectively. Then, these instance pairs
𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅
contrastive self-supervised learning works [25], [55], [56]. are fed into the contrastive learning model 𝐶𝐿𝑀(·) to calcu-
Concretely, for a batch of 𝑃 𝑖 = (𝑣 𝑖 ,G𝑖 ,𝑦 𝑖) with batch size latethepredictedscores (𝑠 𝑖 ( , + 1 ),··· ,𝑠 𝑖 ( , + 𝑅 ),𝑠 𝑖 ( , − 1 ),··· ,𝑠 𝑖 ( , − 𝑅 )),which
𝑁, the objective function is given as follows: is computed via Equation (9). Finally, the anomaly score of
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 8
Algorithm 1 The Overall Procedure of CoLA scores is one of the potential directions in the future since
Input: Attributed network: G = (V,E,X), Number of train- differenttypesofanomalieswillshowdifferentcharacteristics
ingepochs:𝑇,Batchsize: 𝐵,Numberofsamplingrounds: of the score distribution.
𝑅.
Output: Anomaly score mapping function: 𝑓(·).
1: Randomlyinitializetheparametersofcontrastivelearning D. CoLA: An Anomaly Detection Framework
model (W(0),··· ,W(𝐿),W(𝑑))
2: // Training phase. In this subsection, we introduce the overall pipeline of our
3: for 𝑡 ∈1,2,··· ,𝑇 do proposed CoLA framework. The pipeline is divided into two
4: B ← (Randomly split V into batches of size 𝐵) phases: training phase and inference phase. In the training
5: for batch 𝑏 = (𝑣 1 (cid:48),··· ,𝑣(cid:48) 𝐵 ) ∈ B do phase, the contrastive learning model is trained with sampled
6: Sample positive instance pairs (𝑃 1 (+),··· ,𝑃 𝐵 (+)) instance pairs in an unsupervised fashion. After that, the
where (𝑣(cid:48),··· ,𝑣(cid:48) ) are the target node respectively. anomalyscoreforeachnodeisobtainedintheinferencephase.
1 𝐵
7: Sample negative instance pairs (𝑃 1 (−),··· ,𝑃 𝐵 (−)) The overall procedure of our CoLA framework is depicted
where (𝑣(cid:48),··· ,𝑣(cid:48) ) are the target node respectively. in Algorithm 1. In an epoch of the training phase, we first
1 𝐵
8: Calculate the predicted scores split the set of nodes V into several mini-batches. Then,
(𝑠(+),··· ,𝑠(+),𝑠(−),··· , 𝑠(−)) of instance pairs in each iteration, a positive pair and a negative pair are
1 𝐵 1 𝐵
(𝑃(+),··· ,𝑃(+),𝑃(−),··· ,𝑃(−))
via Equation (9).
sampled for each node in the current mini-batch. After that,
1 𝐵 1 𝐵 the corresponding predicted scores are calculated with the
9: Calculate L via Equation (10).
instancepairs,thentheBCElossiscomputed.Tooptimizethe
10: Back propagation and update the parameters of con-
trastive learning model (W(0),··· ,W(𝐿),W(𝑑)). parametersofcontrastivelearningmodel,abackpropagationis
executed with a gradient descent algorithm. After the training
11: end for
phase, a multi-round positive-negative sampling procedure
12: end for
is carried out to generate anomaly scores. As described in
13: // Inference phase.
14: for 𝑣 𝑖 ∈V do Subsection IV-C, for each node 𝑣 𝑖, 𝑅 positive pairs and 𝑅
15: S w a h m er p e le 𝑣 𝑖 𝑅 is t p h o e s t i a ti r v g e et i n n o s d ta e n . ce pairs (𝑃 𝑖 ( , + 1 ),··· ,𝑃 𝑖 ( , + 𝑅 )) n tr e a g in a e ti d ve m p o a d ir e s l a to re c s a a lc m u p la le te d, th th e en pre th d e ic y te a d re sc fe o d res in . t F o in th a e lly w , e th ll e -
16: S w a h m er p e le 𝑣 𝑖 𝑅 is t n h e e ga ta ti r v g e et i n n o s d ta e n . ce pairs (𝑃 𝑖 ( , − 1 ),··· ,𝑃 𝑖 ( , − 𝑅 )) ano D m is a c l u y ss s i c o o n re o is n o a b n ta o in m e a d ly via de E t q e u c a ti t o io n n f ( o 1 r 2). large-scale net-
works.Asweintroducedabove,thecontrastivelearningmodel
17: Calculate the predicted scores
(𝑠(+),··· ,𝑠(+),𝑠(−),··· ,𝑠(−))
of instance pairs
is trained by a mini-batch of instance pairs independently in
𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅 𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅
an iteration. Meanwhile, the computation of anomaly scores
(𝑃(+),··· ,𝑃(+),𝑃(−),··· ,𝑃(−))
via Equation (9)
𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅 𝑖,1 𝑖,𝑅 is also completely independent. That is to say, the space
18: Calculate the anomaly score 𝑓(𝑣 𝑖) via Equation (12).
complexityofCoLAisuncorrelatedwiththenumberofnodes
19: end for 𝑛 at all. Such a nice property makes it possible to apply our
proposedCoLAframeworktolarge-scalenetworks.Whenthe
sizeofnetworkislarge(𝑛islarge),wedonotneedtofeedthe
𝑣 𝑖 is obtained by computing the average value of multi-round
full network into the GCN model, which is unfeasible due to
differences between the scores of negative and positive pairs:
theexplosiveneedforspacecomplexity[41],[42].Instead,in
(cid:205)𝑅 (𝑠(−) −𝑠(+)) our framework, the full network is decomposed into instance
𝑓(𝑣 𝑖) = 𝑟=1 𝑖,
𝑅
𝑟 𝑖,𝑟 , (12) pairs and all we need is to adjust the batch size and subgraph
size to meet the memory constraint.
where 𝑓(·) is the anomaly score mapping function which is
the ultimate goal of our anomaly detection framework.
From a statistical perspective, executing the 𝑅 rounds sam-
E. Complexity Analysis
pling is to estimate the difference of normality between a
node’s neighboring substructure and remote substructure. In Weanalyzethetimecomplexityoftheproposedframework
principle, the larger 𝑅 is, the more accurate the estimation is. by considering the three main components respectively. For
In practice, we set 𝑅 as a hyper-parameter of our framework, instance pair sampling, the time complexity of each RWR
and we discuss the selection of 𝑅 in Section V-D. subgraphsamplingisO(𝑐𝛿)(𝛿isthemeandegreeofnetwork).
Furthermore, computing the mean value is the simplest In the inference phase, we run 𝑅 rounds of sampling for
way to process multi-round results. Theoretically, there are each node, then the total time complexity becomes O(𝑐𝑛𝛿𝑅).
morestatisticalpropertiesthatcanbemined,suchasvariance, For the GNN-based contrastive learning model, the time
minimum/maximumvalue,anddistributionproperty.However, complexity is mainly generated by the GNN module, which
in practice, we found that calculating the average value is the is O(𝑐2) for each pair and O(𝑐2𝑛𝑅) for a total. For anomaly
most effective solution compared with introducing the above score computation, the time complexity is far less than the
factors. In spite of this situation, we still think that the further above two phases, so here we ignore this term. To sum up,
mining of statistical properties of the multi-round predicted the overall time complexity of CoLA is O(𝑐𝑛𝑅(𝑐+𝛿)).
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 9
TABLEII set of anomalies (i.e., structural anomalies and contextual
THESTATISTICSOFTHEDATASETS.THEUPPERTWODATASETSARE anomalies) for each dataset:
SOCIALNETWORKS,ANDTHEREMAINDERSARECITATIONNETWORKS.
• Structuralanomaliesinjection.Thestructuralanomalies
Dataset ♯ nodes ♯ edges ♯ attributes ♯ anomalies are acquired by perturbing the topological structure of
networks [65]. Concretely, some small cliques composed
BlogCatalog 5,196 171,743 8,189 300
of originally unrelated nodes are generated as anomalies.
Flickr 7,575 239,738 12,407 450
ACM 16,484 71,980 8,337 600 The intuition is that in a small clique, a small set of
Cora 2,708 5,429 1,433 150 nodes are much more closely linked to each other than
Citeseer 3,327 4,732 3,703 150
average, which can be regarded as a typical structural
Pubmed 19,717 44,338 500 600
ogbn-arxiv 169,343 1,166,243 128 6000 anomaloussituationinreal-worldnetworks[66].Tomake
the cliques, we first specify the clique size 𝑝 and the
number of cliques 𝑞. When generating a clique, we
V. EXPERIMENTS randomly choose 𝑝 nodes from the set of nodes V
and make them fully connected. As such, the selected
In this section, we conduct experiments to show the effec-
𝑝 nodes are all marked as structural anomaly nodes. To
tiveness of CoLA framework. We first introduce the datasets
generate 𝑞 cliques, we repeat the above process for 𝑞
usedforexperimentsandexperimentssetup.Then,wedemon-
times. Finally, a total of 𝑝×𝑞 structural anomalies were
strate the experimental results including the comparison of
injected.Accordingtothesizeofdatasets,wecontrolthe
performance, parameter study, and ablation study.
number of injected anomalies. We fix 𝑝 = 15 and set 𝑞
to 10,15,20,5,5,20,200 for BlogCatalog, Flickr, ACM,
A. Datasets
Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed and ogbn-arxiv, respectively.
We evaluate the proposed framework on seven widely • Contextual anomalies injection. Here, we create the
used benchmark datasets for anomaly detection on attributed contextual anomalies by perturbing the attribute of nodes
networks. The datasets include two social network datasets following the schema introduced by [64]. When generate
(BlogCatalog and Flickr) and five citation network datasets asinglecontextualanomalynode,wefirstrandomlypick
(Cora,Citeseer,Pubmed,ACMandogbn-arxiv)[61],[2],[62]. a node 𝑣 𝑖 as the target, and then sample another 𝑘 nodes
The statistics of these datasets are demonstrated in Table II, V(𝑐) = (𝑣(𝑐),··· ,𝑣(𝑐)) as a candidate set. After that, for
1 𝑘
and the detailed descriptions are given as follows: each 𝑣(𝑐) ∈ V(𝑐), we calculate the Euclidean distance
• Social Networks. BlogCatalog and Flickr1 [2] are two between its attribute vector x(𝑐) and 𝑣 𝑖’s attribute vector
typical social network datasets acquired from the blog x𝑖. Then, we pick the node 𝑣( 𝑗 𝑐) ∈ V(𝑐) which has the
sharing website BlogCatalog and the image hosting and largestEuclideandistanceto𝑣 𝑖,andchangex𝑖 tox
𝑖
(𝑐) .To
sharing website Flickr, respectively. In these datasets, balancetheequalnumbersofthetwotypesofanomalies,
nodes denote the users of websites, and links represent we set the number of context anomalies as 𝑝×𝑞, which
the following relationships between users. In social net- means the above operation is repeated for 𝑝×𝑞 times to
works, users usually generate personalized content such generateallthecontextualanomalies.Here,weset𝑘 =50
as posting blogs or sharing photos with tag descriptions, to ensure the disturbance amplitude is large enough.
thus these text contents are regarded as node attributes. Followingtheaforementionedinjectionmethods,wefinally
• Citation Networks. Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed2 [61], ACM obtaintheperturbednetworks,andthetotalnumberofanoma-
[62], and ogbn-arxiv3 [63] are five available public lies is given in the last column of Table II. All the category
datasets,whicharecomposedofscientificpublications.In labels are removed in our experiments, and the anomalous
these networks, nodes denote the published papers while labels are only visible in the inference phase.
edgesrepresentthecitationrelationshipsbetweenpapers.
Forthefirstfourdatasets,theattributevectorofeachnode B. Experimental Settings
is the bag-of-word representation whose dimension is
In this subsection, we introduce the settings of our ex-
determinedbythedictionarysize.Forogbn-arxivdataset,
periments, including baselines for comparison, metrics for
eachnodehasa128-dimensionalattributevectorobtained
evaluation, and parameter setting of our framework.
byaveragingtheembeddingsofwordsinthepaper’stitle
1) Baselines: We compare our proposed framework CoLA
and abstract. Note that the ogbn-arxiv dataset is a large-
with five popular methods for anomaly detection or graph
scale graph dataset from Open Graph Benchmark (OGB)
contrastive learning:
where over 169k nodes and 1.1m edges are contained.
• AMEN4 [16]. AMEN is an ego-network analysis-based
Since there are no ground-truth anomalies in the aforemen- anomaly detection method. It identifies anomalies by
tioned datasets, synthetic anomalies are needed to inject into evaluating the attribute correlation of nodes per ego-
the clean attributed networks for our evaluation. Following network.
the previous researches [64], [65], [13], we inject a combined • Radar5 [17]. Radar is a residual analysis-based method.
It characterizes the residuals of attribute information
1http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/pages/datasets
2http://linqs.cs.umd.edu/projects/projects/lbc 4https://github.com/phanein/amen
3https://github.com/snap-stanford/ogb 5http://people.virginia.edu/%7Ejl6qk/code/Radar.zip
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 10
and its coherence with network information for anomaly detection performance and efficiency, we use PCA [68] to
detection on networks. reduce the dimension of attributes to 30 before we run the
• ANOMALOUS6 [18]. ANOMALOUS is also based on shallow baselines (AMEN, Radar and ANOMALOUS). For
the residual analysis. It is a joint learning framework DGIWeemployEquation(12)tocomputetheanomalyscore.
that conducts attribute selection and anomaly detection 4) Computing Infrastructures: Our proposed learning
as a whole based on CUR decomposition and residual frameworkisimplementedusingPyTorch1.4.0[69].ForRWR
analysis. subgraph sampling, we use the existing graph sampling func-
• DOMINANT7 [13]. DOMINANT is the state-of-the- tion from library DGL 0.3.1 [70]. The computation of ROC
art unsupervised anomaly detection framework based on andAUCisacquiredbyScikit-learn[71].Allexperimentsare
deeplearning.Itutilizesagraphconvolutionautoencoder conducted on a personal computer with Ubuntu 16.04 OS, an
to jointly reconstruct the adjacency matrix as well as the NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2070 (8GB memory) GPU, an Intel
attributematrix.Itevaluatestheabnormalityofeachnode Core i7-7700k (4.20 GHz) CPU and 15.6 GB of RAM.
by computing the weighted sum of the reconstruction
error terms.
C. Anomaly Detection Results
• DGI8 [55].DGIisarepresentativemethodforcontrastive
graph representation learning. It generates node embed- In this subsection, we evaluate the anomaly detection per-
ding via node-graph contrasting. A bilinear function formance of the proposed framework by comparing it with
servesasadiscriminatortopredicttheagreementbetween the baseline methods. The comparison of ROC curves is
node and original/corrupted graphs. demonstrated in Figure 4. By calculating the area under the
ROCcurves,theAUCscoresofthesevenbenchmarkdatasets
2) Evaluation metrics: To measure the performance of our
are shown in Table III for comparison. According to the
proposedframeworkandthebaselines,weemployROC-AUC
results, we have the following observations:
as the metrics. ROC-AUC is widely used in previous works
for the evaluation of anomaly detection performance [13], • On all seven datasets, our proposed CoLA achieves the
best anomaly detection performance. In particular, com-
[17], [18]. The ROC curve is a plot of true positive rate (an
paredwiththebestresultsofthebaselines,ourframework
anomaly is recognized as an anomaly) against false positive
obtains a significant improvement of 6.44% on AUC
rate(anormalnodeisrecognizedasananomaly)accordingto
averagely. The main reason is that CoLA successfully
the ground-truth anomalous labels and the anomaly detection
captures the relationship between each node and its local
results. AUC value is the area under the ROC curve, which
substructurewiththeinstancepairsampling,andextracts
represents the probability that a randomly chosen abnormal
discriminative scores from the contextual and structural
node is ranked higher than a normal node. The AUC which is
information with the GNN-based contrastive learning
close to 1 means the method has high performance.
model.
3) Parameter Settings: For the sake of efficiency and
performance, we fixed the size 𝑆 of the sampled subgraph • Compared to the deep learning-based methods, the shal-
lowmethods,AMEN,RadarandANOMALOUS,cannot
(number of nodes in the subgraph) to 4. For isolated nodes
achieve satisfying results. Their performance is limited
or the nodes which belong to a community with a size
by the shallow mechanisms to deal with the high-
smaller than the predetermined subgraph size, we sample the
dimensional node attributes and the sparse, complex
available nodes repeatedly until an overlapping subgraph with
network structures.
thesetsizeisobtained.IntheGNN-basedcontrastivelearning
model, the layer number of the GNN module is set to 1 • The contrastive learning method, DGI, does not show
competitive performance, even if it uses a contrastive
since it is enough to extract the information of subgraphs
mechanismandanomalyscorefunctionsimilartoCoLA.
with a small size. The embedding dimension is fixed to be
64. In the training phase, the batch size 𝐵 is set to 300 for Thereasonisthatitadopts“fullgraphv.s.node”instance
pair when performing contrastive learning, which cannot
each dataset. Adam [67] optimization algorithm is employed
capture the abnormality in local substructure. In the
to train the contrastive learning model. We train the model
contrast, the “target node v.s. local subgraph” leveraged
for BlogCatalog, Flickr and ACM datasets with 400 epochs,
by CoLA is sensitive to the local abnormal information.
and train on Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed datasets with 100
epochs. The learning rates for Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed and • Compared to the autoencoder-based deep method DOM-
Flickr are 0.001, while the learning rates for BlogCatalog and INANT, CoLA achieves significant performance gains,
ACM are set to 0.003 and 0.0005, respectively. For ogbn- especially on the five citation network datasets. Two
arxivdataset,wetrainfor2,000epochsusingalearningrates main reasons are: (1). CoLA well exploits the network
of 0.0001. In the inference phase, we sample 256 rounds to data by constructing the instance pairs, instead of simply
reconstructing the original data; (2). The objective of
acquire accurate detection results for each dataset. We run
CoLAisrelatedtothetargetofanomalydetection,which
our proposed framework for 10 times and report the average
can train the learning model to generate discriminative
results to prevent extreme cases. For the consideration of
scores for the final abnormality ranking.
6http://people.virginia.edu/%7Ejl6qk/code/ANOMALOUS.zip • CoLA has better performance advantages on the five
7https://github.com/kaize0409/GCN_AnomalyDetection citation network datasets (ACM, Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed
8https://github.com/PetarV-/DGI and ogbn-arxiv). The possible reason is that the mean
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 11
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
1.0
0.8
0.6
AMEN 0.4
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT 0.2
DGI
CoLA
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
(a) BlogCatalog
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
1.0
0.8
0.6
AMEN 0.4
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT 0.2
DGI
CoLA
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
(b) Flickr
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
1.0
0.8
0.6
AMEN 0.4
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT 0.2
DGI
CoLA
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
(c) ACM
etaR
evitisoP
eurT AMEN
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT
DGI
CoLA
(d) Cora
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
1.0
0.8
0.6
AMEN 0.4
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT 0.2
DGI
CoLA
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
(e) Citeseer
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
1.0
0.8
0.6
AMEN 0.4
Radar
ANOMALOUS
DOMINANT 0.2
DGI
CoLA
0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate
(f) Pubmed
etaR
evitisoP
eurT
AMEN
CoLA
(g) ogbn-arxiv
Fig.4. ROCcurvescomparisononsevenbenchmarkdatasets.Theareaunderthecurveislarger,theanomalydetectionperformanceisbetter.Thedashed
lineisthe“randomline”whichindicatestheperformanceunderrandomlyguessing.
TABLEIII
AUCVALUESCOMPARISONONSEVENBENCHMARKDATASETS.OOMMEANSTHEISSUEOUT-OF-MEMORYISINCURRED.THEBESTPERFORMING
METHODINEACHEXPERIMENTISINBOLD.
Methods Blogcatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed ogbn-arxiv
AMEN 0.6392 0.6573 0.5626 0.6266 0.6154 0.7713 0.5279
Radar 0.7401 0.7399 0.7247 0.6587 0.6709 0.6233 OOM
ANOMALOUS 0.7237 0.7434 0.7038 0.5770 0.6307 0.7316 OOM
DOMINANT 0.7468 0.7442 0.7601 0.8155 0.8251 0.8081 OOM
DGI 0.5827 0.6237 0.6240 0.7511 0.8293 0.6962 OOM
CoLA 0.7854 0.7513 0.8237 0.8779 0.8968 0.9512 0.8073
degrees of citation networks (1.43 to 6.89) are much D. Parameter Study
smaller than those of social networks (31.64 to 33.05).
In this subsection, we investigate the impacts of three
Therefore,oncitationnetworks,thesampledsubstructure
important parameters on the performance of the proposed
for each node has a better consistency under multiply
framework: the number of sampling rounds, the size of
rounds of sampling, which makes the model can capture
subgraph, and the dimension of latent embedding. We only
the abnormality of each node more clearly.
perform these experiments on the six small-scale datasets
• CoLA is successfully run on the large-scale network
owing to the limitation of efficiency.
dataset ogbn-arxiv, while most of the baselines (Radar,
1) Effect of the number of sampling rounds 𝑅: In this
ANOMALOUS, DOMINANT, and DGI) fail to output
experiment, we modify the value of 𝑅 to study its impact
the detection results due to their large requirement of
on AUC. The performance variance results are demonstrated
memory.Meanwhile,ourframeworkalsooutperformsthe
in Figure 5(a). As we can see, when the detection results
shallow method AMEN by a wide margin. The reason
are only computed with one-shot sampling, the detection
whyCoLAcandetectanomalyonlarge-scalenetworksis
performanceispoor.Withthesamplingroundsgrowing,there
that the space complexity of CoLA is independent of the
number of nodes 𝑛, which has been analyzed in Section is a significant boost in the AUC of each dataset within
a certain range. However, when 𝑅 is larger than 256, the
IV-D.
performance improvement obtained by setting a larger 𝑅
becomes little. The experiment results empirically prove our
analysisinSubsectionIV-C:with 𝑅 getslarger,theestimation
for abnormalities for each node becomes more accurate. On
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 12
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Number of Sampling Rounds
CUA
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
BlogCatalog Cora
0.70
Flickr Citeseer
ACM Pubmed
0.65
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Subgraph Size
(a) Samplingroundsw.r.t.AUCvalues
CUA
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
BlogCatalog Cora
Flickr Citeseer
ACM Pubmed 0.65
1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256
Embedding Dimension
(b) Subgraphsizesw.r.t.AUCvalues
CUA
BlogCatalog Cora
Flickr Citeseer
ACM Pubmed
(c) Embeddingdimensionw.r.t.AUCvalues
Fig. 5. The experimental results for parameter study. The subfigure (a), (b) and (c) shows the impact of different sampling rounds, subgraph sizes and
embeddingdimensionw.r.t.AUCvaluesrespectively.
the basis of this result, we set 𝑅 = 256 in other experiments and the estimation mode of anomaly score. Here we only
to balance performance and efficiency. discuss the performance on the six small-scale datasets.
2) Effectofsubgraphsize 𝑐: Wefurtheranalyzethesignif- 1) Effect of readout function: In this experiment, we in-
icance of the subgraph size 𝑐 on different datasets. We report vestigate the choice of different types of readout functions
the AUC scores over different choices of subgraph sizes in in our framework. We carry out the experiments on three
Figure 5(b). As shown in the figure, when 𝑐 is extremely possible readout functions: Max Pooling, Min Pooling, and
small (𝑐 =2), the AUC is relatively low. The possible reason Weighted Average Pooling. Max/Min Pooling is to collect
is that, in such a situation, only the target node itself and the maximum/minimum value on each dimension to generate
one of its neighbors are concluded in the subgraph, but there the pooled vector. Weighted Average Pooling first takes the
isnostructuralinformationotherthantheconnectionbetween embedding of the target node as a “query” and calculates
thesetwonodesisconsidered.Thelackofenoughneighboring the similarities between query and node embeddings in the
structural information results in poor performance. Within local subgraph by inner production. Then, a Softmax function
certain value ranges, the AUC increases follow 𝑐. Then, when is utilized to regularize the similarities which further serve
𝑐 >5, the detection performance declines with 𝑐 get larger. A as “weights” to compute the readout output with a weighted
reasonabledescriptionisthat:whenthesubgraphsizeislarge, average. Note that CoLA adopts Average Pooling, which is
the nodes with relatively long distance to the target node will simpler than Weighted Average Pooling.
be sampled into the subgraph. However, these remote nodes The experimental results are illustrated in Table IV. Com-
are generally independent of the abnormality, which becomes pared to other readout function, Min Pooling always has a
the“noiseinformation”forourdetectiontask.Foralldatasets, minor performance, which means that using the minimum
better detection performance can be obtained when the value value would lead to lose of information. Max Pooling has
of 𝑆 is around 4. Consequently, we fix the value of 𝑐 to 4 for competitive performance on most of the datasets, but is not
thesakeofrunningefficiencyandrobustnessoveralldatasets. the best. Although Weighted Average Pooling costs heavier
3) Effect of embedding dimension 𝑑: We explore the sen- computation,ithasacloseperformancetoMaxPooling,which
sitivity of embedding dimension 𝑑 for CoLA framework. We indicates that the similarity-based weighted average may lead
alter the value of 𝑑 to see how it affects the performance of to a sub-optimal solution for subgraph readout. Compared to
ourmethod.TheperformancechangeofCoLAisillustratedin otherreadoutfunctions,CoLAwithAveragePoolingachieves
Figure5(c).Foreachdataset,theAUCvalueincreaseswiththe the best results on 4 of 6 datasets. On ACM and Pubmed,
embeddingdimensiongrowing.Whenaddingthedimensionof it also shows competitive performance, which evinces that
embedding from 1-neuron to 32-neurons, the performance of Average Pooling has a better capability of generalization.
anomalydetectionsteadilyrises;butwhenwefurtherincrease 2) Effect of the source of score computation: In Equation
𝑑, the performance gain becomes light. We observed that, (12), we consider the predicted scores of both positive in-
for most of the datasets, 64-dimension latent embedding can stances and negative instances as the source of anomaly score
provide sufficient information for the downstream contrastive computation. Here, we investigate the contribution of each
learning and anomaly detection tasks. As a result, we set the term. Table VI shows the AUC values of two variants of our
hyper-parameter 𝑑 to 64 for efficiency consideration. framework:CoLA(+)denotesthatonlythepredictedscoresof
positiveinstancesareusedtocalculatetheanomalyscores,and
CoLA(-) means that only the negative scores are considered.
E. Ablation Study
Finally, CoLA(+/-) is the full version that considers both
In this subsection, we study the effect of changing different sides. As we can observe, for two social network datasets, the
readout functions, the source of anomaly score computation, predicted scores of negative instances are more helpful to the
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 13
TABLEIV
EFFECTOFDIFFERENTREADOUTFUNCTIONONAUCVALUES.THEBESTPERFORMINGMETHODINEACHEXPERIMENTISINBOLD.
BlogCatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed
Max Pooling 0.7787 0.7507 0.8303 0.8681 0.8849 0.9508
Min Pooling 0.7567 0.7389 0.7968 0.8553 0.8743 0.9350
Weighted Average Pooling 0.7801 0.7494 0.8175 0.8764 0.8927 0.9523
CoLA(Average Pooling) 0.7854 0.7513 0.8237 0.8779 0.8968 0.9512
TABLEV
EFFECTOFDIFFERENTSOURCEOFSCORECOMPUTATIONONAUCVALUES.THEBESTPERFORMINGMETHODINEACHEXPERIMENTISINBOLD.
BlogCatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed
CoLA(+) 0.7551 0.7213 0.8002 0.8658 0.8571 0.9509
CoLA(-) 0.7745 0.7502 0.7718 0.6891 0.8254 0.6531
CoLA(+/-) 0.7854 0.7513 0.8237 0.8779 0.8968 0.9512
TABLEVI
EFFECTOFDIFFERENTSCOREESTIMATIONMODEONAUCVALUES.THEBESTPERFORMINGMETHODINEACHEXPERIMENTISINBOLD.
BlogCatalog Flickr ACM Cora Citeseer Pubmed
CoLA(min) 0.7611 0.7219 0.5407 0.7525 0.6279 0.7987
CoLA(mean+min) 0.7729 0.7371 0.6903 0.8165 0.7599 0.8796
CoLA(max) 0.6465 0.6071 0.7093 0.8152 0.7906 0.8839
CoLA(mean+max) 0.7383 0.6989 0.7652 0.8678 0.8638 0.9359
CoLA(std) 0.3719 0.3581 0.8037 0.5453 0.7515 0.7035
CoLA(mean+std) 0.7665 0.7241 0.8372 0.8869 0.9047 0.9532
CoLA(-std) 0.6316 0.6449 0.2149 0.4256 0.2455 0.2969
CoLA(mean-std) 0.7910 0.7526 0.7562 0.8479 0.8608 0.9387
CoLA(mean) 0.7854 0.7513 0.8237 0.8779 0.8968 0.9512
final result. Nevertheless, for the remaining citation network correlation between abnormality and standard deviation;
datasets, the positive instances have a greater contribution. oncontrary,apositivecorrelationisshownforthecitation
Despite the above difference, considering both positive and networks.
negative scores is always beneficial to anomaly detection • Calculating the mean value is not the best but the most
performance. robust choice. For all datasets, we can obtain a relatively
3) Effect of estimation mode of anomaly score: In CoLA, good detection performance with CoLA(mean). Further-
we compute the mean values as the anomaly scores, which more, compared with only using maximum/minimum
is a standard estimation mode for multiple sampling. In this valueorstandarddeviation,theintroductionofadditional
experiment, we discuss the effect of other estimation modes. mean values will lead to a better result.
As shown in Table VI, we carry out our experiment on
six estimation modes: CoLA(max)/CoLA(min) means using VI. CONCLUSION
the maximum/minimum value of multi-round predictions as
In this paper, we make the first attempt to apply contrastive
anomalyscores;CoLA(std)andCoLA(-std)adoptthestandard
self-supervised learning to the anomaly detection problem of
deviation and the opposite of standard deviation as anomaly
attributed networks. We propose a novel anomaly detection
score, respectively; the rest three situations consider the sum
framework, CoLA, which is consisted of three components:
of mean value and corresponding terms as an estimation.
contrastive instance pair sampling, GNN-based contrastive
We make the following observations:
learning model, and multi-round sampling-based anomaly
• Using maximum/minimum value as the anomaly score is score computation. Our model successfully captures the re-
less effective than using mean value. Considering both lationship between each node and its neighboring structure
the maximum/minimum and the mean value can obtain and uses an anomaly-related objective to train the contrastive
better performance, but it is still worse than only using learning model. A series of experiments on seven benchmark
the mean value. datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the
• Introducingthestandarddeviationcanbringextraperfor- proposed framework in solving the anomaly detection prob-
mance improvement. However, the correlation between lems on attributed networks.
abnormality and standard deviation varies with different We believe that the proposed framework opens a new
datasets: for BlogCatalog and Flickr, there is a negative opportunitytoexpandself-supervisedlearningandcontrastive
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 14
learningtoincreasinglygraphanomalydetectionapplications. [21] L. Ruff, R. Vandermeulen, N. Goernitz, L. Deecke, S. A. Siddiqui,
In future works, we will extend self-supervised contrastive A. Binder, E. Müller, and M. Kloft, “Deep one-class classification,”
inInternationalconferenceonmachinelearning,2018,pp.4393–4402.
learning-based anomaly detection methods to more com-
[22] Y.Li,X.Huang,J.Li,M.Du,andN.Zou,“Specae:Spectralautoen-
plex network/graph data, e.g., heterogeneous graph, spatial- coderforanomalydetectioninattributednetworks,”inProceedingsof
temporal graph, and dynamic graph. the28thACMInternationalConferenceonInformationandKnowledge
Management,2019,pp.2233–2236.
[23] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastivepredictivecoding,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1807.03748,2018.
REFERENCES
[24] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple frame-
workfor contrastivelearningofvisual representations,”arXivpreprint
[1] Z.Liu,C.Chen,X.Yang,J.Zhou,X.Li,andL.Song,“Heterogeneous
arXiv:2002.05709,2020.
graphneuralnetworksformaliciousaccountdetection,”inProceedings
[25] R.D.Hjelm,A.Fedorov,S.Lavoie-Marchildon,K.Grewal,P.Bachman,
ofthe27thACMInternationalConferenceonInformationandKnowl-
A.Trischler,andY.Bengio,“Learningdeeprepresentationsbymutual
edgeManagement,2018,pp.2077–2085.
informationestimationandmaximization,”inInternationalConference
[2] L.TangandH.Liu,“Relationallearningvialatentsocialdimensions,”
onLearningRepresentations,2018.
inProceedingsofthe15thACMSIGKDDinternationalconferenceon
[26] L. Liao, X. He, H. Zhang, and T. S. Chua, “Attributed social network
Knowledgediscoveryanddatamining,2009,pp.817–826.
embedding,”inarXiv:1705.04969,2017.
[3] Y. Zhang, Y. Fan, W. Song, S. Hou, Y. Ye, X. Li, L. Zhao, C. Shi,
[27] S.Pan,J.Wu,X.Zhu,C.Zhang,andY.Wang,“Tri-partydeepnetwork
J.Wang,andQ.Xiong,“Yourstyleyouridentity:Leveragingwritingand
representation,”inIJCAI,2016,pp.1895–1901.
photography styles for drug trafficker identification in darknet markets
[28] W.Yu,W.Cheng,C.Aggarwal,B.Zong,H.Chen,andW.Wang,“Self-
overattributedheterogeneousinformationnetwork,”inTheWorldWide
attentiveattributednetworkembeddingthroughadversariallearning,”in
WebConference,2019,pp.3448–3454.
2019 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2019,
[4] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and
pp.758–767.
J. Leskovec, “Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale rec-
[29] Y.LeCun,Y.Bengio,andG.Hinton,“Deeplearning,”nature,vol.521,
ommendersystems,”inProceedingsofthe24thACMSIGKDDInterna-
no.7553,pp.436–444,2015.
tionalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscovery&DataMining,2018,pp.
[30] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
974–983.
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
[5] W. Fan, Y. Ma, Q. Li, Y. He, E. Zhao, J. Tang, and D. Yin, “Graph
onNeuralNetworksandLearningSystems,pp.1–21,2020.
neural networks for social recommendation,” in The World Wide Web
[31] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli, “A new model for learning
Conference,2019,pp.417–426.
in graph domains,” in Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint
[6] T.N.KipfandM.Welling,“Semi-supervisedclassificationwithgraph
ConferenceonNeuralNetworks,2005.,vol.2. IEEE,2005,pp.729–
convolutionalnetworks,”inInternationalConferenceonLearningRep-
734.
resentations,2017.
[32] J.Bruna,W.Zaremba,A.Szlam,andY.LeCun,“Spectralnetworksand
[7] P. Velicˇkovic´, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and locallyconnectednetworksongraphs,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1312.6203,
Y.Bengio,“Graphattentionnetworks,”inInternationalConferenceon
2013.
LearningRepresentations,2018.
[33] M. Henaff, J. Bruna, and Y. LeCun, “Deep convolutional networks on
[8] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph graph-structureddata,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1506.05163,2015.
neural networks?” in International Conference on Learning Represen- [34] M.Defferrard,X.Bresson,andP.Vandergheynst,“Convolutionalneural
tations,2019. networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Advances
[9] Z. Ying, J. You, C. Morris, X. Ren, W. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec, inneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2016,pp.3844–3852.
“Hierarchicalgraphrepresentationlearningwithdifferentiablepooling,” [35] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Van-
inAdvancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2018,pp.4800– dergheynst, “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Ex-
4810. tendinghigh-dimensionaldataanalysistonetworksandotherirregular
[10] M. Zhang and Y. Chen, “Weisfeiler-lehman neural machine for link domains,”IEEEsignalprocessingmagazine,vol.30,no.3,pp.83–98,
prediction,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International 2013.
ConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandDataMining,2017,pp.575– [36] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
583. Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
[11] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” arXiv inneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2017,pp.5998–6008.
preprintarXiv:1611.07308,2016. [37] F. Wu, A. H. S. Jr., T. Zhang, C. Fifty, T. Yu, and K. Q. Weinberger,
[12] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. v. d. Hengel, “Deep learning for “Simplifyinggraphconvolutionalnetworks,”inICML,2019,pp.6861–
anomalydetection:Areview,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2007.02500,2020. 6871.
[13] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection [38] H.NTandT.Maehara,“Revisitinggraphneuralnetworks:Allwehave
onattributednetworks,”inProceedingsofthe2019SIAMInternational islow-passfilters,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1905.09550,2019.
ConferenceonDataMining. SIAM,2019,pp.594–602. [39] S.Pan,R.Hu,S.-f.Fung,G.Long,J.Jiang,andC.Zhang,“Learning
[14] Y. Chen, X. S. Zhou, and T. S. Huang, “One-class svm for learning graphembeddingwithadversarialtrainingmethods,”IEEETransactions
in image retrieval,” in Proceedings 2001 International Conference on onCybernetics,vol.50,no.6,pp.2475–2487,2019.
Image Processing (Cat. No. 01CH37205), vol. 1. IEEE, 2001, pp. [40] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
34–37. learningonlargegraphs,”inAdvancesinneuralinformationprocessing
[15] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. Schweiger, “Scan: a structural systems,2017,pp.1024–1034.
clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM [41] W.-L. Chiang, X. Liu, S. Si, Y. Li, S. Bengio, and C.-J. Hsieh,
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data “Cluster-gcn: An efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph
mining,2007,pp.824–833. convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
[16] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
neighborhoods,” in Proceedings of the 2016 SIAM International Con- 2019,pp.257–266.
ferenceonDataMining. SIAM,2016,pp.207–215. [42] H.Zeng,H.Zhou,A.Srivastava,R.Kannan,andV.Prasanna,“Graph-
[17] J.Li,H.Dani,X.Hu,andH.Liu,“Radar:Residualanalysisforanomaly saint:Graphsamplingbasedinductivelearningmethod,”inInternational
detectioninattributednetworks.”inIJCAI,2017,pp.2152–2158. ConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2020.
[18] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint [43] J.Klicpera,S.Weißenberger,andS.Günnemann,“Diffusionimproves
modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks.” in graphlearning,”inAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
IJCAI,2018,pp.3513–3519. 2019,pp.13354–13366.
[19] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weakly- [44] Z.Wu,S.Pan,G.Long,J.Jiang,andC.Zhang,“Graphwavenetfordeep
supervisedanomalydetection,”2020. spatial-temporal graph modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00121,
[20] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection 2019.
with deviation networks,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD [45] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Con-
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, nectingthedots:Multivariatetimeseriesforecastingwithgraphneural
2019,pp.353–362. networks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.11650,2020.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS 15
[46] S.Wan,C.Gong,P.Zhong,S.Pan,G.Li,andJ.Yang,“Hyperspectral [69] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
image classification with context-aware dynamic graph convolutional T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An
network,”IEEETransactionsonGeoscienceandRemoteSensing,2020. imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances in
[47] G. Wan, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Haffari, “Reasoning NeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.32,pp.8026–8037,2019.
like human: Hierarchical reinforcement learning for knowledge graph [70] M.Wang,D.Zheng,Z.Ye,Q.Gan,M.Li,X.Song,J.Zhou,C.Ma,
reasoning,” in International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence L.Yu,Y.Gai,T.Xiao,T.He,G.Karypis,J.Li,andZ.Zhang,“Deep
2020. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence graph library: A graph-centric, highly-performant package for graph
(AAAI),2020,pp.1926–1932. neuralnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1909.01315,2019.
[48] Y. Xian, Z. Fu, S. Muthukrishnan, G. De Melo, and Y. Zhang, “Rein- [71] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
forcementknowledgegraphreasoningforexplainablerecommendation,” O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg et al.,
in Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” the Journal of machine
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2019, pp. 285– Learningresearch,vol.12,pp.2825–2830,2011.
294.
[49] M.ZhuandH.Zhu,“Mixedad:Ascalablealgorithmfordetectingmixed
anomaliesinattributedgraphs,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIConference
onArtificialIntelligence,vol.34,no.01,2020,pp.1274–1281.
[50] W.Yu,W.Cheng,C.C.Aggarwal,K.Zhang,H.Chen,andW.Wang,
“Netwalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
in dynamic networks,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
2018,pp.2672–2681.
[51] X. Liu, F. Zhang, Z. Hou, Z. Wang, L. Mian, J. Zhang, and J. Tang,
“Self-supervisedlearning:Generativeorcontrastive,”2020.
[52] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast
for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2020,pp.9729–9738.
[53] J.-B. Grill, F. Strub, F. Altché, C. Tallec, P. H. Richemond,
E.Buchatskaya,C.Doersch,B.A.Pires,Z.D.Guo,M.G.Azar,B.Piot,
K.Kavukcuoglu,R.Munos,andM.Valko,“Bootstrapyourownlatent:
Anewapproachtoself-supervisedlearning,”2020.
[54] X.ChenandK.He,“Exploringsimplesiameserepresentationlearning,”
2020.
[55] P.Velicˇkovic´,W.Fedus,W.L.Hamilton,P.Liò,Y.Bengio,andR.D.
Hjelm,“Deepgraphinfomax,”inInternationalConferenceonLearning
Representations,2019.
[56] K.HassaniandA.H.Khasahmadi,“Contrastivemulti-viewrepresenta-
tionlearningongraphs,”inProceedingsofInternationalConferenceon
MachineLearning,2020,pp.3451–3461.
[57] J. Qiu, Q. Chen, Y. Dong, J. Zhang, H. Yang, M. Ding, K. Wang,
and J. Tang, “Gcc: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network
pre-training,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
ConferenceonKnowledgeDiscovery&DataMining,2020,pp.1150–
1160.
[58] Z.Peng,W.Huang,M.Luo,Q.Zheng,Y.Rong,T.Xu,andJ.Huang,
“Graphrepresentationlearningviagraphicalmutualinformationmaxi-
mization,”inProceedingsofTheWebConference2020,2020,pp.259–
270.
[59] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-Y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
and its applications,” in Sixth international conference on data mining
(ICDM’06). IEEE,2006,pp.613–622.
[60] J.LeskovecandC.Faloutsos,“Samplingfromlargegraphs,”inProceed-
ingsofthe12thACMSIGKDDinternationalconferenceonKnowledge
discoveryanddatamining,2006,pp.631–636.
[61] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassi-
Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI magazine, vol. 29,
no.3,pp.93–93,2008.
[62] J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su, “Arnetminer:
extraction and mining of academic social networks,” in Proceedings
of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discoveryanddatamining,2008,pp.990–998.
[63] W. Hu, M. Fey, M. Zitnik, Y. Dong, H. Ren, B. Liu, M. Catasta, and
J.Leskovec,“Opengraphbenchmark:Datasetsformachinelearningon
graphs,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.00687,2020.
[64] X. Song, M. Wu, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka, “Conditional anomaly
detection,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol.19,no.5,pp.631–645,2007.
[65] K.Ding,J.Li,andH.Liu,“Interactiveanomalydetectiononattributed
networks,”inProceedingsoftheTwelfthACMInternationalConference
onWebSearchandDataMining,2019,pp.357–365.
[66] D. B. Skillicorn, “Detecting anomalies in graphs,” in 2007 IEEE
IntelligenceandSecurityInformatics. IEEE,2007,pp.209–216.
[67] D.P.KingmaandJ.Ba,“Adam:Amethodforstochasticoptimization,”
arXivpreprintarXiv:1412.6980,2014.
[68] S. Wold, K. Esbensen, and P. Geladi, “Principal component analysis,”
Chemometrics and intelligent laboratory systems, vol. 2, no. 1-3, pp.
37–52,1987.
