Artificial Intelligence Approaches for Predictive Maintenance in the
Steel Industry: A Survey
Jakub Jakubowskia,b, Natalia Wojak-Strzeleckab, Rita P. Ribeirof,g, Sepideh Pashamid,e,
Szymon Bobekc, Jo˜ao Gamaf,h, Grzegorz J. Nalepac
aDepartment of Applied Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology, al. Adama
Mickiewicza 30, Krak´ow, 30-059, Poland
bArcelorMittal Poland, al. Jo´zefa Pi(cid:32)lsudskiego 92, 41-308, Dabrowa Gornicza, Poland
cJagiellonian University, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Institute of Applied
Computer Science, and Jagiellonian Human-Centered AI Lab (JAHCAI), and Mark Kac Center for Complex
Systems Research, ul. prof. Stanis(cid:32)lawa L(cid:32)ojasiewicza 11, Krako´w, 30-348, Poland
dRISE Research Institutes of Sweden, Sweden
eCenter for Applied Intelligent Systems Research, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden
fINESC TEC., 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
gFaculty of Sciences, University of Porto, 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
hFaculty of Economics, University of Porto, 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
Abstract
Predictive Maintenance (PdM) emerged as one of the pillars of Industry 4.0, and became
crucial for enhancing operational efficiency, allowing to minimize downtime, extend lifespan
of equipment, and prevent failures. A wide range of PdM tasks can be performed using
Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods, which often use data generated from industrial sensors.
Thesteelindustry, whichisanimportantbranchoftheglobaleconomy, isoneofthepotential
beneficiaries of this trend, given its large environmental footprint, the globalized nature of
the market, and the demanding working conditions. This survey synthesizes the current state
of knowledge in the field of AI-based PdM within the steel industry and is addressed to
researchers and practitioners. We identified 219 articles related to this topic and formulated
fiveresearchquestions,allowingustogainaglobalperspectiveoncurrenttrendsandthemain
research gaps. We examined equipment and facilities subjected to PdM, determined common
PdMapproaches, and identifiedtrends inthe AI methods used todevelopthese solutions. We
exploredthecharacteristicsofthedatausedinthesurveyedarticlesandassessedthepractical
implications of the research presented there. Most of the research focuses on the blast furnace
or hot rolling, using data from industrial sensors. Current trends show increasing interest in
the domain, especially in the use of deep learning. The main challenges include implementing
the proposed methods in a production environment, incorporating them into maintenance
plans, and enhancing the accessibility and reproducibility of the research.
Keywords: artificial intelligence, machine learning, predictive maintenance, steel industry
Preprint submitted to Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence May 22, 2024
4202
yaM
12
]IA.sc[
1v58721.5042:viXra
1. Introduction
The practical uses of AI are growing rapidly, and the impact of its applications in many
areas is clearly visible. The industrial landscape has undergone significant transformations
in recent decades, driven by integrating digital technologies into manufacturing processes, a
phenomenon commonly referred to as Industry 4.0 (I4.0). This fourth industrial revolution
started a new era of automation, connectivity, and data-driven decision making, enhancing
the efficiency and productivity of industrial infrastructures. Concurrently, discussions about
the industry’s future trajectory have resulted in the conceptualization of Industry 5.0 as
a potential next phase. It emphasizes the synergy between human workers and advanced
technologies, advocatingaharmoniouscollaborationbetweenhumanandartificialintelligence
systems (Xu et al., 2021). A large amount of data from industry equipment is used to deliver
solutions to a specific task. An important task in the area of I4.0 is Predictive Maintenance
(PdM) (Mobley, 2002). It involves predicting potential equipment failures before they occur,
allowing engineers to schedule maintenance activities efficiently. Implementing PdM tasks
substantially reduces breakdowns, downtimes, and operational costs (Selcuk, 2017).
One of the potential beneficiaries of I4.0 is the steel industry. Steel, an alloy primarily
composed of iron with varying carbon content and different additives, plays a crucial role in
the global economy and currently does not have a competitive substitute. The steel industry
is an important supplier of materials for dozens of sectors, including construction, infras-
tructure, automotive, and manufacturing. It is also an important employer in many regions,
providing millions of jobs around the world. The distinctive features of the steel industry
make it particularly well suited for the implementation of predictive maintenance applica-
tions. First, steel production remains a resource-intensive industry, contributing significantly
to air pollution and waste generation, which poses environmental challenges (Holappa, 2020).
The globalized nature of the steel market makes it susceptible to economic and geopolitical
factors. Therefore, optimal utilization of resources and production capacities is necessary
to ensure economic stability. Finally, heavy industry is typically an area of increased risk;
therefore, optimal maintenance of equipment can increase the safety of employees. All these
characteristics show the demanding picture of the steel industry, emphasizing the need for in-
telligent process monitoring. The integration of predictive maintenance solutions can increase
environmental, economic, and personnel safety and help build a modern workplace.
WedidnotfindanypreviousworksynthesizingthecurrentstateofknowledgeinAI-based
PdM in the steel industry. Despite the absence of directly comparable works, some loosely
related studies offer insight into tangential areas. Gajdzik and Wolniak (2021) explored the
practical problems of steel manufacturers in transitioning to I4.0. Cemernek et al. (2022)
reviewedthecurrentstateofknowledgewithintheapplicationofMLtechniquesincontinuous
casting,whichisoneofthesteelproductionsteps. Therefore,webelievethatourworkisnovel,
positioningitasapromisingfoundationforresearchersaimingtoadvancePdMmethodologies
for the steel sector and for practitioners seeking to implement such solutions in their facilities.
Our expertise in the surveyed domain allows us to conduct a thorough and comprehensive
survey. The authors of this article are involved in international research projects within the
fields of I4.0 and AI. One of such projects is the CHIST-ERA XPM project1, which is focused
on the development of novel Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques for PdM.
The second example is the CHIST-ERA PACMEL project2, which involved the discovery of
knowledge from industrial sensors and logs using data mining techniques. In both projects,
we cooperated with ArcelorMittal which is one of the most important global corporations
1See https://xpm.project.uj.edu.pl.
2See https://www.chistera.eu/projects/pacmel.
2
in the steel industry. Furthermore, the leading authors of the survey have been working
professionally in this company. This provides us with valuable insight into the requirements
of both research and business, enabling us to approach the field from various perspectives.
The main contributions of this study are the following: a) Identification of the research
papers devoted to AI-driven PdM in the steel industry; b) Synthesis of the current state
of knowledge along different dimensions of the subject, i.e., steel industry, PdM and AI; c)
Overviewofthesurveyedarticleswithreferencetospatialdistributionofresearch,bibliometric
analysis and co-authorship network analysis; d) Determination of the data characteristics
used within the surveyed articles, along with its origin and availability; e) Evaluation of the
practical implications of the proposed methods in manufacturing sites, with a main focus on
the implementation of the methods and their estimated business profits; f) Identification of
current trends, research gaps, and potential future directions in the development of intelligent
PdM solutions for the steel industry.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we briefly introduce the
topicsofPdM,AI,andthesteelindustry. InSect.3wedescribethedetailsofthemethodology
usedforthecollectionofrelevantarticlesanddefinetheresearchquestionsthatdeterminethe
scope of this survey. Then in Sect. 4 we give an overview of the reviewed articles with respect
to their bibliometric data. The specific results of the study, which are based on the defined
research questions, are presented in Sect. 5. The discussion of these findings is provided in
Sect. 6. The paper is concluded in Sect. 7. As our study is large, we moved some detailed
findings to Appendix A.
2. Background
2.1. What is PdM and how it is related to smart industry
Effective management of the production process requires maintenance, whose objective is
to preserve good condition of all assets throughout their lifetime. Total maintenance costs in
the industry are estimated between 15% and 70% of the value of the end product (Thomas,
2018),andincluderepairsandreplacementofassets,downtime,delays,andlabor. Inaddition
to financial losses, poor maintenance can lead to environmental or safety hazards.
Ingeneral,therearethreemainapproachestothemaintenanceofequipment. Thereactive,
or run-to-failure, approach assumes that no specific actions are taken toward a given asset
until it fails or prevents further production. This approach requires little effort from the
maintenance team but can be least cost-effective, leading to unexpected downtimes, and may
cause significant losses in the damaged asset. Preventive maintenance involves the routine
maintenance of the equipment, which is performed at scheduled intervals without considering
theactualconditionofanasset. Arguably,thisisthemostoftenappliedmaintenancepolicyin
today’s industrial facilities. Predictive maintenance aims to monitor the equipment online to
assesstheconditionoftheequipmentinrealtimeandoptimizemaintenanceactions, reducing
total operational costs and increasing productivity.
Data-driven PdM is a technique that uses data analysis tools and machine learning (ML)
algorithms to predict when equipment is likely to fail so that maintenance can be performed
before failure occurs. This approach can help reduce downtime, increase the useful life of
equipment, and improve safety. PdM is a key component of the smart factory concept, which
aims to use data and automation to optimize industrial processes and improve its efficiency.
There are two main groups of PdM tasks according to the time frame they focus on (Pashami
et al., 2023). The first group deals with diagnostics, which focuses on identifying failures that
have already or are currently occurring. The second group deals with prognostics, which aim
to predict potential failures that may occur in the future.
3
Real-time diagnostic tasks require the continuous acquisition and analysis of operating
data along with the external variables required to maintain system health and efficiency. It
also improves the identification of faults and failures. A fault could be caused by a temporary
situation or an external factor that the equipment can recover from. However, a failure can
result from multiple consecutive faults, such as the equipment not recovering or disrupting
its operation. In the context of diagnostics, there are different PdM tasks that progress from
low-level data layers to more high-level conceptual ones (Chandola et al., 2009),(Pashami
et al., 2023),(Chemweno et al., 2016): Anomaly Detection 3 detects unexpected deviations
from the normal process behaviour, often measured using anomaly score, which determines
thepredicteddegreeofanomaly. Fault Detection identifiesifthesystemisexperiencingfaults.
Generally, itcanbeconsideredananomalythatgoesbeyondthedesiredoperatingconditions.
Fault Diagnosis pinpointsthespecificfaultormalfunctionbyanalyzingthedatapatternsand
inferring the root causes. Fault Identification goes beyond diagnosis to precisely identify the
type of fault and quantify its severity. Fault Isolation identifies the specific component or
subsystem that causes the identified fault. Root Cause Analysis (RCA) identifies the focal
root causes of equipment failures. It can be considered as the most in-depth analysis of
the fault, as it aims to determine the underlying causes of the problems. An integrated
approach between these tasks is of utmost importance for an effective maintenance approach.
Early detection, identification, and resolution of faults can lead to significant cost savings and
efficiency improvements.
Process and condition monitoring are concepts related to diagnostics whose objective is to
control the state of the equipment or production line. Although these approaches are similar
to anomaly detection or fault detection, they stand as separate concepts in the literature.
Conditionmonitoringfocusesmoreontheindividualassetorsubsystem(Wakiruetal.,2019),
and process monitoring usually reaches a wider scope (Severson et al., 2015).
PdM system can alsoaim to monitor the quality of the product itself, which is oftencalled
defect detection. This approach helps maintain good properties of the manufactured product
and can indicate issues with the process, resulting in an increase in the number of defects.
However, defects in the product are not necessarily connected with equipment failure but can
be the effect of invalid processing or low-quality input material.
From a prognostics perspective, complementary tasks include: Health Indicator (HI) as-
sessing the current state of a system or machine, often using condition monitoring data and
eventdata. Basedontheestimatedlevelofdegradation, aprognosisofthefuturestatecanbe
made (Pashamiet al.,2023). Remaining Useful Life (RUL) estimatingthe timefor amachine
or system to function before it requires maintenance or replacement (Okoh et al., 2014).
Theseconceptsworktogethertoprovideacomprehensiveunderstandingofthehealthand
useful life of a system. The estimation of HI provides real-time information on the current
state of the system. RUL estimates the remaining life of the system before maintenance
is required. On the basis of these estimates, failure prediction can be attained by setting
thresholds such as end-of-life or time-to-failure.
Ultimately, the approaches described above can be integrated to enable effective predic-
tive maintenance and decision making in industrial machinery. Information on the current
and future state of equipment can be used in scheduling tasks to optimize production and
maintenance plans (Zhai et al., 2021).
2.2. Commonly used AI methods for PdM
The predictive capabilities of AI have provided a successful alternative to classical rule-
based maintenance. The use of AI methods, and especially ML, for predictive maintenance in
3InthisarticletermanomalydetectionreferstoPdMtask,todescribeMLtaskweusetermoutlierdetection.
4
industrialapplicationswasanalyzedinmanysurveyarticles(Surucuetal.,2023;Zhangetal.,
2019c; Zonta et al., 2020). The works mentioned are mainly focused on utilizing different ML
techniques to perform PdM tasks, emphasizing the importance of this AI subfield. Zonta
et al. (2020) also consider physical model-based and knowledge-based approaches along with
data-driven methods (which encompass ML) in their study, however, they claim that the
latter group constitutes the majority of research.
Within this survey, we classified the ML algorithms into several groups:
• Neural Networks (NN) are brain-inspired algorithms in which thousands, or even bil-
lions, of nodes form interconnected layers, transforming the input data into the desired
output. Neural networks, especially deep learning approaches, are arguably the most
versatile and have the broadest application area of all AI methods. Within this group,
we can find relatively simple architectures, e.g. Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) net-
works, as well as more advanced ones, including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN),
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), or Transformer.
• Support Vector Machines (SVM) are models that find a hyperplane that separates dif-
ferent classes of observations in a high-dimensional space.
• Tree-based models recursively partition a feature space into subsets based on the most
informative features (or using random cuts in special cases). A boosting method is
oftenused, inwhichthepredictionsofmanyweaklearnersareconvertedintoonestrong
prediction, to increase the predictive capabilities and generalization.
• Probabilistic models capture uncertainty by modelling data distributions or sequences
using probabilistic frameworks, commonly applied in areas such as anomaly detection.
• Clustering algorithms group similar data points according to their characteristics, al-
lowing data exploration and pattern discovery in unlabeled data sets.
Some of the data-driven approaches, which are not within the family of ML but can serve
as an alternative, include statistical methods, signal processing, and dimensionality reduction.
Besides the algorithm used, ML methods can be categorized, based on the characteristics
of the training procedure, into supervised, unsupervised, or semi-supervised. Supervised ap-
proachesrequireatargetlabelforeachobservationusedfortraining. Thealgorithmminimizes
the discrepancy between the provided label and the prediction of the model. Popular exam-
ples of supervised learning are classification and regression. On the other hand, unsupervised
methods learn the patterns in the data provided without a target, which makes them particu-
larlyusefulinthecaseofunlabeleddata. InthecontextofPdM,unsupervisedlearningcanbe
applied successfully to tasks such as outlier detection or clustering. Hybrid approaches, which
do not fall under any of the above definitions, are referred to as semi-supervised learning.
Most ML algorithms are generally not strictly linked to any specific learning approach.
Regression is a type of supervised learning that creates a mapping of the desired variables.
One of the PdM tasks often expressed as regression is estimating the RUL of the equipment,
which is an essential goal in PdM. Predicting RUL requires labeled data that associate time
with failure for each measurement. However, labeling measurements recorded after the most
recent failure is challenging due to the absence of prior knowledge about the timing of the
subsequent failure (Mashhadi et al., 2020). As a result, certain assumptions are needed to
approximate the regression function using ML techniques, e.g. Recurrent Neural Networks
(Mashhadi et al., 2020). Continuing with supervised learning, Classification techniques are
the go-to approach to determine whether a failure will occur within a specified prediction
horizon (Prytz et al., 2015). Random forest (Prytz et al., 2015) performs well, mainly when
5
failures are infrequent. It is important to note that a variety of techniques, such as neural
networks and support vector machines (Carvalho et al., 2019; Han et al., 2024; Ince et al.,
2016), can also be used similarly for fault detection.
Variousunsupervisedoutlier detection methods,suchasone-classsupportvectormachines
(OCSVM) (Sch¨olkopf et al., 1999) and Isolation Forest (Liu et al., 2008), are used to identify
abnormal patterns or events within the data. These methods can detect anomalies in the
sense of unexpected patterns or events that may indicate potential failures by comparing
them with normal data. This process assigns anomaly scores to data points, and if the score
exceeds a threshold, an alert is triggered. These methods have often been used in scenarios
where the labeled data (e.g., failure instances of equipment) are rare or where the various
types of potential failure are not fully understood. Semi-supervised autoencoder-based (AE)
anomaly detection has recently gained attention (Hojjati et al., 2023; Serradilla et al., 2021),
particularlyforleveragingunlabeleddatainfaultdiagnostics. Theseapproachesaimtocreate
an encoder and decoder neural network to reproduce the data. The idea is that anomalies
should exhibit higher reconstruction errors of the autoencoder compared to normal data to
indicate abnormal behavior.
Within the ML, there are several advanced concepts that can support the development of
PdM methods. Techniques such as transfer learning or domain adaptation (Taghiyarrenani
et al., 2023), aim to minimize the need to label data while simultaneously capturing the
diversity in the data distribution. Various Neural Network architectures are frequently used
in this context (Ganin et al., 2016). When solving real-world problems, a model developed
for a system can be utilized to adapt to a new system or condition, where data is often
more scarce (Taghiyarrenani et al., 2023). Reinforcement learning is a concept in which an
intelligent agent learns to make decisions by interacting with the environment and receiving
feedback in the form of penalties (in the case of wrong decisions) or rewards (in the case
of good decisions). It is another way to handle a small amount of labeled data (Qian and
Liu, 2022; Yan et al., 2023) by interactively enhancing the learning of the labeled data while
sampling unlabeled data simultaneously.
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is a notable advancement in ML techniques
designed to describe the decision of black-box models, such as neural networks. The ex-
plainability aspect is essential to create trust in ML results, particularly in critical domains
such as PdM, where AI-based decision support systems must earn the trust of human ex-
perts (Pashami et al., 2023). Feature importance explanation methods such as Shapley val-
ues(Alabdallahetal.,2022;Hasanetal.,2021;LundbergandLee,2017)areawaytoindicate
variables that cause a failure state.
In addition to ML techniques, several other AI approaches can prove useful for PdM.
AI-based optimization methods, e.g. Genetic Algorithms (GA) or Particle Swarm Optimiza-
tion (PSO), try to find the best possible solution from the subset of all feasible solutions. In
PdM, these methods can be utilized to solve scheduling problems, e.g. optimizing mainte-
nance strategy. In addition, they can be used to optimize the architectures of ML methods,
improving their performance. Knowledge-based methods, e.g. expert systems or fuzzy logic,
use domain expertise and historical data to develop inference mechanisms.
2.3. Steel production
The production of steel is a complex process that involves several manufacturing facilities.
The three main materials used to produce steel are iron ore, coke, and steel scrap. The ex-
tractionandrefinementofrawmaterials(ironoremining, coking, etc.), whicharepreliminary
production steps, are not within the scope of this survey; therefore, we do not discuss them.
Fig. 1 visually represents the typical stages of the steel manufacturing process.
6
Raw Materials Primary Steelmaking Secondary Steelmaking Finishing
Steel Plant Hot Rolling
Irone Ore Sinter Plant
Basic Oxygen Ladle
Furnace Treatments
sinter Slabs Pickling
Pig Billets
Iron Blooms
Molten
Coke Blast Furnace
steel Cold Rolling
Continous
Casting
Annealing
Electric Arc
Steel Scrap
Furnace
Galvanizing
Figure 1: Steel production steps
Figure 2: View on the integrated steel factory in Netherlands (Schoen, 2007)
The first stage of production considered in our study is the sintering of iron ore in a sinter
plant. The objective of this process is to agglomerate iron ore particles into a porous mass,
by mixing it with other materials, such as limestone and coke breeze, and ignite them in a
sintering furnace. The resulting material is an optimal input for the next steelmaking stage.
Sinter and coke serve as fundamental inputs supplied to Blast Furnace (BF), where they
undergo transformation into pig iron. A BF is a large cylindrical furnace that operates by
continuously feeding raw materials to the top of the furnace, where they undergo intense heat
and chemical reactions, including smelting, resulting in the extraction of molten iron and the
formation of slag, which is tapped off separately. Fig. 2 presents a view of an exemplary
integrated steel factory, where the two highest towers are BFs.
As an alternative to BF processes, molten steel can be obtained in Electric Arc Furnace
(EAF), which melts the steel scrap using high-power electric arcs. It does not require the
input of raw materials, and the energy can be supplied from renewable sources, making this
technology generally more environmentally friendly compared to the BF process.
Thenextproductionstepsareperformedwithinsteelplant. Toproducesteelfrompigiron,
a Basic Oxygen Furnace (BOF) is used, in which pure oxygen is blown into a vessel with pig
iron. Following primary steelmaking, which ends with the production of crude steel, various
7
refining processes are performed to adjust the composition and remove impurities. They are
referred to as secondary metallurgy and include e.g. ladle metallurgy, vacuum degassing, or
argon stirring. Throughout these processes, steel is continuously kept in molten form.
To convert steel into semi-finished goods (SFG), for example, slabs, billets or blooms,
Continuous Casting Machine (CCM) is used. Molten steel flows from the ladle through the
tundish into a water-cooled mold where it solidifies and is continuously withdrawn, enabling
production at a constant speed. At the end of the Continuous Casting Machine (CCM), a
solid steel product is cut using a torch cutter, resulting in the production of SFG.
Following the casting process, the SFG is transferred to Hot Rolling Mill (HRM), where
it undergoes further processing. In HRM, SFG is first reheated in a furnace, reshaped in
rolling stands, and cooled down. Rolling reduces the thickness and width of the material,
resulting in its elongation. In the case of certain types of steel products, e.g. strips or wires,
the products are coiled after hot rolling. In some cases hot-rolling is the final step of steel
manufacturing process, but steel may also undergo several further finishing processes to e.g.
give the required shape, improve mechanical properties, or increase anti-corrosion resistance.
Typically, after hot rolling, steel is processed at Pickling Line, which involves immersion
in a bath of acidic solution to remove impurities from the hot rolling process. Subsequently, a
thin layer of oil is applied to the surface to prevent rusting. If a further reduction in thickness
is desired, steel can be rolled in Cold Rolling Mill (CRM). This process is similar to hot
rolling, but does not involve preheating of the product, allowing for more precise control of
thedimensions. Duetotheinternalstressespresentinthesteelaftercoldrolling,theannealing
process is used to restore the steel to its original condition and improve its ductility. Finally,
steel is often subjected to the galvanizing process, which involves coating its surface with a
thin layer of zinc. This results in increased corrosion protection, which extends the useful life
of the product by protecting steel from environmental factors.
The above description of the steel manufacturing process presents the intricate nature of
the steel industry. Proper maintenance of equipment in all facilities is crucial to ensure the
quality and continuity of production. Unplanned downtime at some stage of the production
pipeline may influence subsequent production phases. For example, the unplanned stoppage
on the Pickling Line can impact the feasibility of sustaining production on the CRM, anneal-
ing, and galvanizing lines, which rely on the uninterrupted supply of input steel. Therefore,
there are many practical and business motivations to develop PdM solutions in steel factories.
3. Methodology used in the survey
ThisarticlefollowsthePreferredReportingItemsforSystematicReviews (PRISMA)(Page
et al., 2021) guidelines for the collection of relevant studies to ensure a systematic, compre-
hensive, and transparent approach to conducting surveys. The PRISMA framework consists
of a checklist and a flow chart for systematic review of articles and is a widely recognized tool
for improving the methodological quality of the survey. We also follow the Search, Appraisal,
Synthesis, and Analysis (SALSA) framework, as outlined by Grant and Booth (2009), which
provides a structured methodology to synthesize and analyze the existing literature.
3.1. Research questions
The primary objective of this survey is to examine the current state of knowledge on
the applications of AI methods to perform PdM tasks within the steel industry. Given the
multidisciplinarynatureofthisresearch, weformulateasetofdiverseresearchquestions(RQ)
that provide different perspectives on the subject matter.
• RQ1: What types of installation and equipment are analyzed?
8
• RQ2: What AI methods are used?
• RQ3: What types of PdM approaches are used?
• RQ4: What are the characteristics of the data used?
• RQ5: What is the business impact of the proposed methods?
The listed questions serve as the foundation of our study, through which we analyze different
dimensions of the subject domain.
The objective of RQ1 is to provide information on the specific areas within the steel
industry that received attention from researchers. In addressing this question, we aim to
clarify details such as the specific installations under investigation and the scope of applica-
tion (whether it entails an entire installation, specific subsystems, or individual devices). In
addition, we seek to determine whether the methods employed are directed at existing or new
installations, along with identifying their geographical location.
RQ2 delves into the characteristics of specific AI methods employed in the examined
articles. Within this inquiry, our aim is to determine the type of AI methods and their char-
acteristics. Particularly, in the case of ML methods, we identify the algorithms employed, the
type of learning task (e.g. classification, regression, outlier detection), and the selected train-
ing approach (e.g. supervised, unsupervised). Additionally, we seek to validate whether the
proposed methodology represents a novel approach, assess the explainability of the method,
and determine the authors’ efforts toward making the methodology easily reproducible (e.g.
by providing the source code).
RQ3 explores the subject from the perspective of PdM tasks. Within the scope of this
inquiry, we aim to obtain insights into the specific type of task addressed, such as anomaly
detection, fault diagnosis, RUL estimation, etc. By formulating this research question, we
aim to gain an understanding of the practical implications of the proposed methods for the
maintenance of production facilities.
RQ4 aims to identify the characteristics of the data used in the surveyed articles. The
primary focus of this RQ is on categorizing data based on its format, e.g. tabular, time-series,
or images. In addition, we seek to examine the source of data, i.e., whether the paper uses
real-world or synthetic data, and identify if the data were made publicly accessible to other
researchers, allowing reproducibility and benchmarking.
Thefinalinquiry,RQ5,seekstoevaluatethepracticalapplicationsoftheproposedresearch
results, including the business perspective. This question involves examining whether the
evaluated article involved collaboration with an industrial partner, whether the proposed
solution was implemented in a production environment and whether quantitative benefits
resulting from its application were presented.
3.2. Search methodology
We conducted a systematic review of the literature in four academic databases: Scopus,
Web of Science, IEEE Xplore, and ACM Digital Library. We defined a comprehensive list of
keywords that were categorized to align with the thematic framework of this study. The first
category encompassed terminology associated with AI and covered general concepts such as
”machine learning” and specific methods from the domain. The subsequent keyword category
revolved around PdM and its closely related subjects. In the final category, we assembled
keywords related to the steel industry, encompassing the terminology associated with steel-
making processes and industrial facilities that could be considered. For the complete list of
keywords within these three categories, we refer the readers to Tab. 1.
Our objective, when querying the aforementioned databases, was to identify studies that
incorporated at least one keyword from each of these categories, ensuring a comprehensive
9
Category Keywords
Artificial machine learning; deep learning; artificial intelligence; neural network;
Intelligence data-driven; data mining; pattern recognition; supervised learning; unsupervised
learning; reinforcement learning; clustering; dimensionality reduction; feature
extraction; ensemble methods; transfer learning; generative model; time series;
data streams; support vector machine; decision tree; random forest; gradient
boosting; Bayesian network; generative adversarial network; autoencoder; action
mining; survival analysis; decision support; prediction; predictive systems;
decision rules; rule-based systems; expert systems; SVM; k-means; k-nearest;
XGBoost; XAI; explainability; knowledge discovery; Large Language Models;
recommender systems; knowledge base; knowledge-based systems; ontologies;
computational ontology; intelligent system; agent system; genetic algorithms;
evolutionary algorithms; swarm algorithms; ant colony optimization; heuristic
algorithm; heuristic search; DBSCAN; autonomous decision making; RNN;
CNN; LSTM; transformer; linear regression; regression; classification; particle
swarm optimization;
Predictive maintenance; fault detection; fault identification; fault diagnosis; failure
Maintenance prediction; fault prediction; prognostics; diagnostics; condition monitoring;
anomaly detection; novelty detection; outlier detection; RUL; remaining useful
life; smart monitoring; health management; failure analysis; failure prevention;
maintenance optimization; maintenance scheduling; maintenance planning;
downtime prevention; root cause analysis; health monitoring; survival analysis;
condition assessment; fault isolation; anomaly analysis; outlier analysis; rare
events detection; rare events analysis; failure rate estimation; time to failure;
reliability analysis;
Steel Industry steel industry; steel manufacturing; steel production; steelmaking; blast furnace;
continuous casting; pickling; batch annealing; hot rolling; cold rolling; caster;
sinter; electric arc furnace; ladle furnace; continuous annealing; galvanizing; basic
oxygen furnace; metallurgy; argon oxygen decarburization; vacuum oxygen
decarburization; hot metal; high alloy steel; stainless steel; DRI; vacuum
degassing; desulphurization; dephosphorization; steel shop; melt shop;
Table 1: The complete list of keywords used in the article search procedure
exploration of the research landscape. We did not provide any restrictions on the publication
date of the studies, allowing for the inclusion of documents dating back to the 1980s and
earlier. The search was executed in November 2023.
3.3. Selection of relevant studies
We conducted a multi-step selection process to retrieve previous research articles. In
the first step, we extracted the metadata of all articles that matched the query string. The
metadata included information on the title, year, DOI, authors of the article, as well as its
abstract. We merged all the data for the articles coming from different sources and removed
any duplicates. We also automatically excluded entries that were not a single manuscript,
but proceedings from a conference published with a single DOI.
In the next step, two independent reviewers, each possessing expertise in the fields of AI,
PdM,andsteelindustry,conductedascreeningprocessofarticletitlesandabstracts,toassess
their relevance to the scope of the survey. The fundamental inclusion criterion is that the
abstract or title must have clear indications of the application of AI in the context of a PdM
task within the steel industry. Each reviewer applied a label that indicated the relevance of
the article. Articles clearly unrelated to the survey received a label irrelevant, while those
meeting the inclusion criteria were labeled relevant. For articles of uncertain relevance, the
labelunsure wasapplied. Theassignedlabelswerecomparedandthearticlesmarkedrelevant
10
Query string
IEEE Xplore (n = 314) ACM Digital Library (n = 444)
Scopus (n = 1305) Web of Science (n = 707)
Removed Duplicates
(n = 528)
Automatically excluded
(n = 168)
Abstracts and titles
screened (n = 2074)
Manually excluded
(n = 1743)
Papers sought for
retrieval (n = 331)
noitacifitnedI
gnineercS
Not retrieved
(n = 55)
Papers assessed for
eliglibity (n = 277)
Excluded (n = 58)
Papers included in survey
(n = 219)
dedulcnI
Total records (n = 2770)
Figure 3: PRISMA workflow presenting the number of retrieved and excluded papers at each stage analysis
by both reviewers were included in the study. Subsequently, the studies with an unsure label
were subjected to individual discussion, and their final labels were assigned by consensus.
In practice, a significant portion of articles were excluded at this stage due to their lack of
relevance to the steel manufacturing industry, instead focusing on other industries or aspects.
Following the preliminary screening phase, we acquired the complete texts of the selected
articles. During this stage, certain papers were excluded due to retrieval challenges, e.g.
lack of a DOI, or being blocked by a paywall from a relatively unrecognized publishers. The
retrievedpapersweresubjectedtoanotherscreeningroundtoensureeligibility. Paperslacking
measurable results, short papers, articles mistakenly marked as relevant, or those written in
languages other than English were excluded at this point.
A total of 219 articles met the criteria for inclusion in the survey. The comprehensive
PRISMA workflow diagram, which shows the number of articles retrieved and excluded at
each stage of the selection process, is illustrated in Fig. 3.
3.4. Tools
Inthepreliminaryphase,weexploredseveraltoolstoimprovetheliteraturereviewprocess
and the extraction of information from scientific papers. The most robust and valuable tools,
11
based on our assessment, were used in this article and are briefly described below 4.
The primary analysis of selected papers was performed using a traditional spreadsheet,
in which each row represents a specific paper, and each column corresponds to the specific
informationweaimedtoextract(e.g. thenameofinstallation,theAImethod,etc.). Thecells
within this spreadsheet were completed by two independent reviewers and all discrepancies
were discussed to find a common position. The representation of all papers and research
questions in a table enabled us to summarize the papers in a somewhat manageable manner.
This spreadsheet was later used as input data for Python scripts, which were used to perform
synthesis and more advanced data analysis, as well as visualization.
We also performed a co-occurrence analysis using VOSviewer (van Eck and Waltman,
2010), which allows visualizing textual data in the form of nodes with connections between
them and organizing them in clusters, based on the relationships between them. It can be
useful to synthesize the occurrence of keywords or to create a social network of researchers.
Finally, we used the Natural Language Processing (NLP) model (Kulkarni et al., 2022),
which was trained in the keyword extraction task, to generate keywords for each abstract of
a paper. This was done to provide keywords for all articles and reduce bias with respect to
keywords individually supplemented by the individual authors.
We did not use any Generative AI tools. All the analyses were conducted manually based
on our expertise and with use of automation procedures we programmed ourselves in Python.
4. Overview of Selected Studies
In this section, we provide a high-level overview of the studies selected for this survey. It
serves as a quick reference guide, offering readers a snapshot of the key characteristics of the
surveyed articles before delving into more detailed analyses in subsequent sections. Within
this section, we rely on the information stored in the metadata of the articles and use various
visualization methods to present different characteristics of the articles.
4.1. Publication details
Fig. 4 illustrates the temporal distribution of the articles surveyed based on their publi-
cation years. Research in the area dates back to the late 1980s; however, a notable increase
in published papers occurred after 2009. The subsequent substantial increase is evident in
recent years, particularly after 2020. This reflects an increase in the demand for intelligent
solutions within the steel industry. Predominantly, the publications are concentrated in jour-
nals, however, a noticeable number of papers is also found in conference proceedings. Only a
limited number of articles were identified in the book chapters.
Furthermore, our investigation expanded to an analysis of journals and conferences that
exhibited the highest frequency of papers published within the surveyed domain. Multiple
journals emerged as significant contributors, demonstrating a considerable volume of articles.
Fig. 5a presents the journals with the highest number of published articles, including those
thatfeaturedaminimumofthreepapersincludedinoursurvey. Noteworthyexamplesinclude
the”IEEETransactionsonInstrumentationandMeasurement”and”ISIJInternational”. The
former belongs to the broader group of IEEE journals, while the latter stands as a singular
example of a journal aligned with the steel industry. A substantial volume of papers is also
evident in Elsevier-affiliated journals. The primary focus of many listed journals revolves
around Control Engineering and closely associated fields. However, there are journals such
as ”Expert Systems with Applications” or ”IEEE Transcations on Industrial Informatics”,
4Thetools,whichwetest,butnotusedinthepaperincludetypeset.io,scite.ai,researchrabbit.ai,scholarcy.
12
 ϳ ϴ ϵ ϭ  ϴ ϴ ϵ ϭ  ϵ ϴ ϵ ϭ  Ϭ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϭ ϵ ϵ ϭ  Ϯ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϯ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϰ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϱ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϲ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϳ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϴ ϵ ϵ ϭ  ϵ ϵ ϵ ϭ  Ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϭ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  Ϯ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϯ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϰ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϱ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϲ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϳ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϴ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϵ Ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  Ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϭ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  Ϯ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϯ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϰ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϱ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϲ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϳ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϴ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  ϵ ϭ Ϭ Ϯ  Ϭ Ϯ Ϭ Ϯ  ϭ Ϯ Ϭ Ϯ  Ϯ Ϯ Ϭ Ϯ  ϯ Ϯ Ϭ Ϯ  ϰ Ϯ Ϭ Ϯ
 ϰ Ϭ
 ϯ Ϭ
 Ϯ Ϭ
 ϭ Ϭ
 Ϭ
 Ɛ ƌ Ğ Ɖ Ă W
  Ž Ž Ŭ   Ś Ă Ɖ ƚ Ğ ƌ   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ  W Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ  : Ž Ƶ ƌ Ŷ Ă ů  W Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ
Figure 4: Temporal distribution of analyzed papers based on publication year
 W Ƶ ď ů ŝ Ś Ɛ Ğ ƌ
 /     K ƚ Ś Ğ ƌ   ů Ɛ Ğ ǀ ŝ Ğ ƌ  D  W /   Ƶ ƚ Ž  /   ŵ     Ă    ƚ  /  ŝ  Ŷ  Ž  ƚ  Ŷ  Ğ    ƌ  ^  Ŷ  Đ  Ă  ŝ Ğ  ƚ  Ŷ  ŝ Ž  Đ  Ŷ  Ğ  Ă   Ă  ů   Ŷ    Ě  Ž    Ŷ    Ĩ  Ŷ  Ğ  Ő  ƌ  ŝ  Ğ  Ŷ  Ŷ  Ğ  Đ  Ğ  Ğ  ƌ    ŝ  Ž  Ŷ  Ŷ  Ő
 / Ŷ Ɛ ƚ ƌ Ƶ ŵ Ğ Ŷ ƚ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž  /  Ŷ        Ă    Ŷ    Ě  d    ƌ  D  Ă Ŷ  Ğ  Ɛ  Ă  Ă  Ɛ  Đ  Ƶ  ƚ  ƌ  ŝ Ž  Ğ  Ŷ  ŵ  Ɛ  Ğ   Ž  Ŷ  Ŷ  ƚ  /    ^ Ǉ    Ɛ   /  ƚ  Ŷ  Ğ  ƚ  ŵ  Ğ  /  ƌ    Ɛ  Ŷ  ͕      Ă  D    ƚ    ŝ    Ă  Ž  Ŷ  Ă  Ŷ  ͕  ƚ  Ă    Ă  Ă  ů     Ŷ      Ě  Ž  ƌ    ŝ  Ŷ    ǀ  Ĩ  Ğ  Ǉ  Ğ  ď  Ŷ  ƌ  Ğ    Ğ    ƌ  Ŷ  Ž  Ŷ  Đ  Ŷ  Ğ  Ğ  ƚ  ƚ    ƌ  Ž  ŝ Đ  Ž  Ŷ  Ɛ  ů
 / ^ / :  / Ŷ ƚ Ğ ƌ Ŷ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ă ů  Ă Ŷ Ě  > Ğ Ă ƌ Ŷ ŝ Ŷ Ő  ^ Ǉ Ɛ ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɛ   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ
  Ž Ŷ ƚ ƌ Ž ů   Ŷ Ő ŝ Ŷ Ğ Ğ ƌ ŝ Ŷ Ő  W ƌ Ă Đ ƚ ŝ Đ Ğ   Ś ŝ Ŷ Ğ Ɛ Ğ   Ž Ŷ ƚ ƌ Ž ů   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ
 / &   Ͳ W Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ɛ K Ŷ > ŝ Ŷ Ğ   ŵ Ğ ƌ ŝ Đ Ă Ŷ   Ž Ŷ ƚ ƌ Ž ů   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ
 /      Đ Đ Ğ Ɛ Ɛ   Ě ǀ Ă Ŷ Đ Ğ Ě  / Ŷ Ĩ Ž ƌ ŵ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ  ^ Ǉ Ɛ ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɛ   Ŷ Ő ŝ Ŷ Ğ Ğ ƌ ŝ Ŷ Ő  t Ž ƌ Ŭ Ɛ Ś Ž Ɖ Ɛ
 : Ž Ƶ ƌ Ŷ Ă ů  Ž Ĩ  W ƌ Ž Đ Ğ Ɛ Ɛ   Ž Ŷ ƚ ƌ Ž ů  / Ŷ ƚ Ğ ƌ Ŷ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ă ů   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ  Ž Ŷ  d Ğ Ɛ ƚ  Ă Ŷ Ě  D Ğ Ă Ɛ Ƶ ƌ Ğ ŵ Ğ Ŷ ƚ
 /     d ƌ Ă Ŷ Ɛ Ă Đ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ɛ  Ž Ŷ  Z Ğ ů ŝ Ă ď ŝ ů ŝ ƚ Ǉ   Ś ŝ Ŷ Ă   Ƶ ƚ Ž ŵ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ   Ž Ŷ Ő ƌ Ğ Ɛ Ɛ
 /     d ƌ Ă Ŷ Ɛ Ă Đ ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ɛ  Ž Ŷ  / Ŷ Ě Ƶ Ɛ ƚ ƌ ŝ Ă ů   ů Ğ Đ ƚ ƌ Ž Ŷ ŝ Đ Ɛ   Ś ŝ Ŷ Ğ Ɛ Ğ   Ž Ŷ ƚ ƌ Ž ů  Ă Ŷ Ě   Ğ Đ ŝ Ɛ ŝ Ž Ŷ   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ
 d Ś Ğ   Ă Ŷ Ă Ě ŝ Ă Ŷ  : Ž Ƶ ƌ Ŷ Ă ů  Ž Ĩ   Ś Ğ ŵ ŝ Đ Ă ů   Ŷ Ő ŝ Ŷ Ğ Ğ ƌ ŝ Ŷ Ő  /     / Ŷ  ^  ƚ Ğ  Đ ŝ  ƌ  Ğ  Ŷ  Ŷ  Ă  Đ  ƚ  Ğ  ŝ Ž   Ă  Ŷ  Ŷ  Ă  Ě  ů         Ž  Ě  Ŷ  ǀ  Ĩ  Ă  Ğ  Ŷ  ƌ Ğ  Đ Ğ  Ŷ  Ě  Đ Ğ      Ž  Ŷ  Ŷ  Ă    ů    Ǉ ƚ  Ă  ŝ  ƚ  Đ  Ă  Ɛ
 ^ Ğ Ŷ Ɛ Ž ƌ Ɛ  / Ŷ ƚ Ğ ƌ Ŷ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ă ů  : Ž ŝ Ŷ ƚ   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ  Ž Ŷ  E Ğ Ƶ ƌ Ă ů  E Ğ ƚ ǁ Ž ƌ Ŭ Ɛ
  ǆ Ɖ Ğ ƌ ƚ  ^ Ǉ Ɛ ƚ Ğ ŵ Ɛ  ǁ ŝ ƚ Ś   Ɖ Ɖ ů ŝ Đ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ɛ   Ž Ŷ Ĩ Ğ ƌ Ğ Ŷ Đ Ğ  Ž Ŷ  & Ƶ ů ů Ǉ   Đ ƚ Ƶ Ă ƚ Ğ Ě
 ^ Ǉ Ɛ ƚ Ğ ŵ  d Ś Ğ Ž ƌ Ǉ  Ă Ŷ Ě   Ɖ Ɖ ů ŝ Đ Ă ƚ ŝ Ž Ŷ Ɛ
 Ϭ  Ϯ  ϰ  ϲ  ϴ  Ϭ  ϭ  Ϯ  ϯ  ϰ
 W Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ɛ  W Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ɛ
(a)Journals (b)Conferences
Figure 5: Journals and conference, which published the highest number of papers
which are more aligned with the field of Computer Science. These diverse characteristics of
the journals highlight the inter-disciplinary nature of the domain.
Similarly, we examined conferences that appear most frequently in the list of surveyed
papers. Fig. 5b presents conferences that published a minimum of two papers in their pro-
ceedings. Although there is no single conference with a notably exceptional number of pub-
lished articles, a noticeable presence of IEEE-related conferences is observed. Many of these
conferences align with the field of Control Engineering (e.g., ”IEEE Data Driven Control and
Learning Conference,” ”Chinese Control Conference”), while instances of conferences related
to Computer Science are also apparent (e.g., ”International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
works”, ”IEEE Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics”). In particular, three
of the conferences featured in the list are specifically of Chinese origin, suggesting a higher
level of research activity within the subject domain from researchers in China.
The prevalence of research originating in China becomes particularly visible when ex-
amining the affiliations of authors. The spatial distribution of the affiliated papers between
countries is depicted in Fig. 6. We note that more than half of the articles are affiliated
with Chinese universities. In addition to this, European universities emerge as the second
major hub for research activities. Noteworthy contributions have also been made from other
countries such as Canada, the United States, Russia, India, and Japan.
13
 ϭ  ϱ  ϭ Ϭ  ϭ ϱ  х Ϯ Ϭ
  Ĩ Ĩ ŝ ů ŝ Ă ƚ Ğ Ě  Ɖ Ă Ɖ Ğ ƌ Ɛ
Figure 6: Geographical distribution of research, based on the authors’ country of affiliation
4.2. Visualization of keywords and authors association
To extract information on the main characteristics of the surveyed articles we used NLP
model (Kulkarni et al., 2022) trained on keyword extraction task. This model was used
to generate keywords from the abstracts of all selected articles. The keywords were then
visualized with the use of VOSViewer (Fig. 7). We limited the visualization to keywords
to 50 instances, while ensuring that each keyword appeared at least three times. The colors
representwordclusters, andthesizeofthenodeindicatesthenumberofkeywordoccurrences.
Figure 7: Visual representation of most frequent keywords generated from abstracts and their relationship.
Created using VOSViewer
The most commonly used keywords are related to PdM tasks, including terms like fault
detection, fault diagnosis, and process monitoring. Additionally, predictive maintenance is
frequently mentioned. In the case of AI, terms like machine learning and deep learning are
popular, along with specific algorithms such as support vector machine, neural network, or
14
genetic algorithm. In the steel industry context, keywords often pertain to various manu-
facturing processes and facilities like blast furnace, hot rolling, and cold rolling, as well as
broader terms like steel industry. Despite the focus on steel production, some keywords are
more general and encompass manufacturing concepts, like industrial process or industrial in-
ternet of things. However, we also noted keywords that are not directly relevant to the survey
subject or widely recognized approaches. For instance, fractional Brownian motion refers to
a statistical method that can model industrial systems, but it is not commonly associated
with PdM applications. Similarly, Tennessee Eastman process denotes a chemical process
described in literature, serving as a benchmark in PdM research, despite not directly aligning
with the main focus of the study.
Fig. 8 shows a social network of authors, which presents their impact in the field and
the main collaboration teams. Each node corresponds to an author, and its size and color
depend on the number of articles with which this author is affiliated. The edges between
the nodes represent the co-authoring of at least one paper. The names of the authors who
co-authoredatleastfivearticlesarealsoincludedinthegraph. Weobservetwolargerclusters
of researchers who worked intensively in the field, and, except for that, the research teams
are rather independent and authored only singular papers. However, several of these teams
showed increased research activity, which is reflected in the high number of articles published.
1 2 3 4 >5
No. of papers
Zhang, Hanwen
Chen, Maoyin
Yang, Chunjie
Dong, Jie
Zhou, Donghua
Zhang, Kai
Ma, Liang
Peng, Kaixiang
Chai, Tianyou
Figure 8: Social Network of authors of analyzed papers. Each node represents a single author, the proximity
oftwonodesreferstoco-authoringofatleastonepaper. Thecolorsandsizeofthenodesdepictsthenumber
of published papers
5. Results of the Study
This section provides a comprehensive analysis of the articles surveyed. We present a
detailed account of the findings, emphasizing the most common research approaches, as well
as more original solutions. We individually addressed each research question, allowing for a
thorough exploration of specific aspects of the study. Each research question is composed of
15
several more detailed inquiries, which are described in detail in Sect. 3.1. Our aim is to allow
the reader to gain a clear and comprehensive understanding of the current state of knowledge
and provide a roadmap for navigating within the subject of the study. The synthesis of the
most important findings is presented in Sect. 6.
5.1. RQ1: What types of installation and equipment are analyzed?
Electric Arc Continuous
Sinter Plant Blast Furnace Steel Plant Hot Rolling Pickling Cold Rolling Annealing Galvanizing
Furnace Casting
entire entire entire subsystem entire entire subsystem entire entire entire
installation installation installation •converter installation installation •loop control installation installation installation
subsystem subsystem subsystem •r li e n f i r n a g ctory subsystem subsystem • s w y a s s te te m liquor subsystem subsystem subsystem
•sinter •cooling •transformer •crane •casting roller •feedback recovery •rolling stand •furnace •zinc bath
machine system •shredder •casting speed control •tension •furnace
• • • g h to a e r s a p r f e t lo h d w o car s • i l n ad g l l e e device • si c n r g ys le ta d lli e z v e i r ce • • s f l c a i y o n m s o i t s l i e h i n n m i a n g r g mill p •s r t o r d ip uct si s n y g st le em device • t s t s e e y y m n s s t t s e e p io m m e n rature s • • i b w n e e g a l l d r e i e n d r g e s vice
s • i a n x g ia le l f d an evice • • • b e m x e o h a l a r d i u n s g t s fan • • r r o o l u li g n h g i n s g ta m nd ill • • • b m w e o o a r t r k o i n r r g o s lls single device •z ro in ll c e b r ath
•blowers •looper
•raceway single device product
•wall • • b b a e c a k ri u n p g s roll •strip product
product •gearbox •strip
•silicon •looper
content •motor
•pump
•rolling
cylinder
•work rolls
product
•strip
Figure 9: The taxonomy of the installations and equipment subjected to PdM in the analyzed papers
To characterize the equipment considered for PdM in steel facilities, we defined a three-
level categorization. At the first level, we extracted information about the type of installation
that was the subject of the study. We then identified the scope of the task, which indicates
whethertheproposedmethodwasappliedtoanentireinstallation,asubsystem,anindividual
device, or a product. Finally, we extracted information on the name of the asset that was the
subjectofthestudy. Thiswasnotdefinedforthemethodsappliedtotheentireinstallation,as
this would be equal to the name of the installation itself, making this information redundant.
Based on this categorization, we created a taxonomy presented in Fig. 9.
Within this research question, we also extracted information on whether the study is
related to existing or new / planned installations and their geographical locations.
Fig. 10 summarizes the findings in terms of type of installation, scope, and asset. As
observed in Fig. 10a BF and HRM are two major areas of research, accounting for more than
60% of all research. Except for these two installations, the CRM is the third most frequent
area subjected to PdM, accounting for more than 10% articles. A more detailed overview
of the installations being studied is presented in Fig. 11, where their temporal occurrence is
visualized. We observe that until 2020, the highest number of the articles focused on BF.
After this point, the share of papers related to hot rolling increased greatly and outnumbered
those devoted to BF. An increased interest in cold rolling is also observed.
Moving on to the scope of the studies, which is shown in Fig. 10b, we observe a high
diversity in this matter, with each defined category having a significant number of representa-
tives. However, the smallest number of studies focused solely on the product, while the other
categories were approximately evenly represented.
Regarding the occurrence of specific assets, as shown in Fig. 10c, there is a much higher
fragmentation of the research, which we find natural considering the variety of equipment
used in the steel production process. The highest amount of research was devoted to finishing
mill, which is a subsystem of HRM. Next, significant contributions were made with respect to
the steel strip (product). For individual devices, we observe the presence of typical equipment
16
Ste 4 e . l 6 P % lant Pick 2 li . n 8 g % Line Ar E c l 2 F e . u c 8 t r % r n i a c ce O 3 t .2 h % er
Cold Rolling Mill
11.0% Cas C t o in n 6 g t . i 4 n M % u a o c u h s ine An C n o e n 4 a t . l i 6 i n n % u g o L u i s ne Galva H n 3 o i . t z 2 i D % n i g p Line
Hot Rolling Mill Blast Furnace
32.6% 28.9%
(a)Typeofinstallation
Single Device Product
29.4% 9.0%
Entire Plant Subsystem
32.2% 29.4%
(b)Scopeofthetask
Mold
2.0%
Bearings
5.4%
Torpedo Car
2.7%
Other
28.9%
Wo 6 rk .0 R % olls Bl 2 o . w 7% ers
Motor
2.7% Ladle Welder
2.0% 2.0%
Rolling Stand
6.0% Gearbox Wall Looper
4.7% 4.0% 3.4%
Finishing Mill Strip
16.1% 11.4%
(c)Asset
Figure10: OccurrencefrequencyofareassubjectedtoPdMwithrespecttothenameofinstallations,scopeof
the solution, and name of equipment
usedinindustrialprocesses,i.e.,bearings,gearboxes,andmotors,butalsodevicesmorespecific
to steel production, for example loopers and work rolls.
Ourresultsindicate thatmostofthe researchwork wasdedicatedto existinginstallations.
We identified only three cases in which AI methods were proposed for new facilities. Marcu
et al. (2008) designed a fault detection system for a hydraulic looper in HRM, which was
validated using data from existing installations, but the intention of the authors is to use this
toolforanyneworexistingfacility. Hanetal.(2021)developedaframeworkfortheprediction
ofRULincastingrollersbasedonthedigitaltwin. Gerzetal.(2022)proposedadecentralized
anomaly detection system, which was tested on the HRM during the commissioning phase. In
some cases, the research was not devoted to the actual manufacturing facility, but the authors
performedlaboratoryexperiments,whichwerethemainsourceofdata(Jietal.,2021;Junichi
and Yukinori, 2020; Peng et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022a; Spirin et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023;
Yi and Zeng, 2009; Zhao et al., 2021).
Most studies did not specify the location of the installation, which provided the data. The
count of installations with respect to their geographical location (including only articles that
clearly indicated this location) is presented in Fig. 12. We find that most of the installations
were located in China (more than 30), which is consistent with the affiliation of the authors
17
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
selcitra
.oN
Blast Furnace Continuous Annealing Line Hot Rolling Mill
Cold Rolling Mill Continuous Casting Machine Steel Plant
Figure 11: Historical distribution of installations subjected to predictive maintenance
2 4 6 8 >10
No. of papers
Figure 12: Location of steel facilities used as a case-study in surveyed papers
presented in Fig. 6. A significant number of installations subjected to the study were also
located in Europe. Several use cases have been found in Japan, USA, India, and Russia.
Togivemoredetailedinformationonthismanner, inthefollowingsubsectionswedescribe
the characteristics of the assets subjected to PdM for each installation individually. Addi-
tionally, the complete list of installations with the scope of the equipment considered within
them is provided in Appendix A.1.
Sinter plant
Sinter plant, which is the first step considered in steel production, did not attract much
attention from researchers. Liu et al. (2021) developed a system for sinter batching, which
detects abnormal sinter performance. The primary focus of this paper is not solely anomaly
detection, but optimization of the sintering process. Egorova et al. (2018) applied PCA and
ANN to predict faults in the sintering process.
Blast Furnace
BlastFurnacewasoneofthemainareasofresearchinthearticlessurveyed. Thespecificity
of BF, in which the majority of physical and chemical processes take place in one place, that
is, the furnace, affects the predominance of research devoted to the development of solutions
for the entire installation. In addition, the harsh environment, along with the complexity and
smooth boundaries of the processes that take place inside the furnace, makes it demanding to
18
preciselymonitortheconditionsinsidedifferentpartsofthefurnace. Duetothelargenumber
of papers on this scope of study, we refer the reader to Tab. A.3 for a detailed list of articles.
Except for the approach that aims to apply PdM to the entire installation, we identified
several studies related to more specific subsystems. The subsystems that were analyzed the
most frequently were torpedo cars, which are used to transport molten steel from BF to steel-
making facilities (Chernyi et al., 2022; Li et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021a; Yemelyanov et al.,
2021)andfurnacewalls(seeTab.A.3). Otherareasstudiedincludethecoolingsystem(Mene-
ganti et al., 1998), gas flow subsystem (Zhao et al., 2014), raceway (Puttinger and Stocker,
2019) and the hearth (Wang et al., 2022a). Regarding individual equipment, blowers (Bo and
Hao, 2015; Fu et al., 2023; Raducan et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2012) and axial fan (Zhang et al.,
2021c) were studied. Furthermore, we identified two articles that focus on monitoring the
silicon content in the final product of the BF process (Liu et al., 2011a; Weng et al., 2023).
Electric Arc Furnace
Studies related to EAF focused on the ironmaking process in the furnace or transformer,
which is one of the most crucial subsystems. In terms of articles devoted to the furnace,
Wang et al. (2015b) proposed using wavelet analysis and ML to detect anomalies in the
EAF process. Later they proposed (Wang and Mao, 2018) alternative approach for this task
(WangandMao,2018), whichutilizedclusteringmethods. Choietal.(2020)aimedtopredict
the time to the next maintenance of the EAF based on the sensor data collected. For the
transformer subsystem, Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014) proposed a method to detect
faultsonthesecondarysideoftheEAFbasedonprimarysidedata, whileShiyanetal.(2019)
used vibration data to monitor this asset.
Steel Plant
Under the term Steel Plant, we included all metallurgical processes that occur after BF,
but before casting. Two studies were related to the converter process, which takes place in
the BOF; Chistyakova and Novozhilova (Chistyakova and Novozhilova, 2019) developed an
intellectualsystemforthecontrolofrefractorylining, andDongetal.(2023)proposedamon-
itoring methodology for a converter process. In terms of studies related to ladle metallurgy,
Wang et al. (2018) developed an outlier detection scheme for the temperature of molten steel
in the ladle furnace. Similarly, Emelianov et al. (2022) also focused on monitoring the lining
condition in the BOF, but their method relies on thermograms of steel ladles. Liu and Hao
(2021) proposed an anomaly detection method of the ladle driving force. Finally, Kim et al.
(2006)implementedalifetimeevaluationsystemforaladlecrane. Netoetal.(2021)proposed
a method to optimize the maintenance policy of a shredder, a machine used to crush steel
scrap before entering the steelmaking process.
Continuous Casting
ThestudiesdevotedtotheCCMoftenfocusedonmonitoringtheentireprocess(Holloway
etal.,1991;Xuetal.,2023;Yangetal.,2021b;Zhouetal.,2022a). Regardingthemaintenance
of individual equipment, the greatest attention was paid to mold monitoring (Bhattacharya
et al., 2005; Luk’yanov et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2023). Other equipment studied includes
bearings (Qing Liu et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2014), casting roller (Han et al., 2021), crystal-
lizer (David et al., 2012), and exhaust fan (Liu et al., 2023). Furthermore, Zhou et al. (2022b)
studied the CCM subsystem related to casting speed.
Hot Rolling Mill
Hotrollingmillistheinstallationwithinthesteelindustry, whichreceivedthemostatten-
tion from researchers. For a detailed list of articles related to HRM with respect to the scope
19
and type of asset considered, we refer the reader to Tab. A.7. The highest number of research
papers was devoted to a finishing mill, which is a subsystem consisting of multiple rolling
stands placed in tandem; its task is to reduce the hot strip to the desired thickness. Within
thissubsystem,somestudiesweremorefocusedanddevotedtoasinglerollingstand(Acernese
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Lisounkin et al., 2002; Panagou et al., 2022b; Ruiz-Sarmiento
et al., 2020), work rolls (Anagiannis et al., 2020; Jakubowski et al., 2021a; Jiao et al., 2021;
Kovaˇciˇc et al., 2019; Lebru´n et al., 2013) or backup rolls (Yuan et al., 2023). Furthermore,
the roughing mill was studied by Ma et al. (2021a), which is a preliminary rolling stand that
reshapes the steel slab before it enters the finishing mill.
Regarding work related to other hot rolling subsystems, we identified studies that address
the problem of belt conveyor monitoring (Junichi and Yukinori, 2020), laminar cooling (Wang
and Peng, 2023), and feedback control system (Li and Ding, 2020). For the studies focused
on individual devices, gearbox (see Tab. A.7) , motor (Fagarasan et al., 2004; Ma et al., 2023;
Sarda et al., 2021), looper(Garcia-Beltran et al., 2004; Jiang et al., 2021; Marcu et al., 2004,
2008), bearings (Farina et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2016a; Peng et al., 2022) and pumps (Goode
et al., 2000) were also subjected to PdM tasks. Finally, we identified many studies devoted
to monitoring the entire installation or steel strip, which are listed in Tab. A.7.
Pickling Line
In the study of the pickling process, four articles exclusively devoted to this process were
identified. Bouhouche et al. (2005, 2006) focused on fault detection in the loop control sys-
tem of the production line. Fan et al. (2017) considered a waste liquor recovery plant, and
Fleischanderl et al. (2022) focused on defect detection on the strip surface.
Cold Rolling Mill
Variety of different approaches were proposed for monitoring the cold rolling process. The
highest number of articles is related to the PdM of the entire production plant (Beden et al.,
2021; Beden and Beckmann, 2023; Chen et al., 2020; Lepenioti et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023), which technologically resembles the HRM finishing mill. Some effort of researchers is
present in monitoring the strip (Chen et al., 2021b; Yang et al., 2009, 2021a), maintenance
of work rolls (Fouka et al., 2021; Jakubowski et al., 2022; Lakshmanan et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2021b), rolling stand (Lu et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022b; Shin and Kwon, 2018) and
tension system (Arinton et al., 2012). In terms of individual equipment, we identified studies
involving the detection or diagnosis of bearings (Ji et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2022a; Zhao et al.,
2021) or motor (Sun and An, 2009b) failures. Finally, the study by Lu et al. (2020) focused
on the problem of chattering, which is a common problem that occurs in CRM.
Annealing Line
Inthecontextofannealing, thereexisttwomaintechnologiesthroughwhichtheprocessis
conductedbatchannealingandcontinuousannealing. Allofthesurveyedpapersarededicated
to the continuous annealing process. Yingwei Zhang et al. (2013), Liu et al. (2014a,b) and
Tiensuu et al. (2020) used measurements from the entire installation to monitor the process.
Additionally, Liu et al. studied tension subsystem (Qiang Liu et al., 2011) and strip thickness
faults (Liu et al., 2018a). Tan et al. (2010) focused their research on the annealing furnace,
while Wang et al. (2012) and Lu et al. (2013) limited their methods only to the furnace
temperature system. Finally, Zhang and Ma (2011) addressed the problem of fault diagnosis
in the looper.
Galvanizing Line
There are two widely used techniques for galvanizing steel: Hot Dip Galvanizing (HDG),
which involves immersing the steel strip in a zinc bath and Electrogalvanizing, which involves
20
immersing it in electrolyte and applying electric current. In our review of the literature, we
foundonlyarticlesrelatedtotheHDGprocess. Acommonlyexploredelementinthesestudies
isthewelder,responsibleforjoiningsteelstripsatthebeginningoftheprocess(Bonikilaetal.,
2022; Choi et al., 2023; Meyer and Mahalec, 2022). Deb´on and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz (2012)
applied PdM methods to the zinc bath, Simon et al. (2021) specifically focused on the zinc
bath roller, and Chen et al. (2021a) studied bearing faults. Finally, condition monitoring was
applied to the entire galvanizing process by Fan and Zhang (2018).
Miscellaneous
Herewediscussallfacilitiesandapproachesthatdonotfittheinstallationsdiscussedabove
or cover more than one production line. The work of Ray and Murty (1989), which is the
oldest identified study, is related to the PdM system for steel production facilities, in general.
An integrated approach was also presented in the work Cao et al. (2022), that proposed an
ontology for the steelmaking process. Other use cases, which incorporate multiple lines, were
presented in works by Sun and An (2009a) (cold rolling and pickling), Shigemori (2013) (steel
plant and hot rolling), Slany and Vascak (1996) (steel plant and CCM), Das (2020) (EAF,
steelplant, CCMandhotrolling), KumarandDas(2022)(sintering, blastfurnace, steelplant
and hot rolling) and Tiensuu et al. (2020) (hot rolling, cold rolling, pickling and annealing).
Moreover, the works of Jin et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2021) were dedicated to the Energy
Management System, which concerns the flows of energy gases between various installations.
Some of the researchers did not specify the steel facilities, which were examined in their
work. Three of these studies (Hao et al., 2022; Simi´c et al., 2014; Straat et al., 2022) concern
the monitoring of the steel strip. Moreover, we identified studies that applied PdM to a
common equipment present in steel factories but did not specify the installation, making it
impossible to deduce it. These studies covered maintenance of fan machinery (Yi and Zeng,
2009), air compressor (B and Umesh, 2019) and engine (Ray, 1991).
5.2. RQ2: What AI methods are used?
We aimed at categorizing all the types of AI methods used in the articles. During the
analysis of the methods employed, we identified certain studies that do not use strictly AI-
based methods, for example, statistical or analytical models. However, to make this survey
more comprehensive, we decided to include them in the findings, as these methods can stand
as an alternative to AI-based approaches.
Fig.13presentsthefrequencyofoccurrenceofeachgroupwithintheanalyzedarticles. We
observe the predominance of ML methods, with NN being the most frequently one. Despite
this, SVMs, probabilistic and tree-based methods are also widely used. Non-AI approaches,
such as statistics and dimensionality reduction, also had a significant share in the methods
utilized. We note that statistical approaches, which are discussed in more detail in Sect. 5.3
were used mainly as primary prediction methods, but dimensionality reduction (discussed in
Sect. 5.3), was frequently used as preprocessing step for other ML methods.
Fig. 14 presents historical trends with regard to the methods applied in the articles sur-
veyed. NN are one of the approaches that has appeared in the early stages of research in
the surveyed domain and now are the predominant method employed. The great increase in
research in that area began around 2020, which we mainly associate with the development of
deep learning methods, these are discussed in more detail in Sect. 5.2.
Inthefollowingsubsections, wediscusseachgroupofmethods, highlightingthemostcom-
mon and original approaches. While we briefly discuss the methods and algorithms utilized
within each group, we focus on their application within the steel industry and do not delve
into their mathematical foundations; for this, we refer the reader to specialized publications
on this matter (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Marsland, 2014).
21
Rules Other
Clustering 1.4% 3.1%
Support Vectors 2.8% Signal Processing
10.3% 1.7% Analytical Model
3.1%
Nearest Neighbors Optimization
2.8% 2.4% Expert System Ontology
1.4% 1.4%
Statistics
11.4% Probabilistic Tree
6.6% 5.5%
Dimensionality
Neural Networks Reduction
32.4% 13.8%
Figure13: Occurrencefrequencyofmethodsusedinthesurveyedarticles. Non-AImethodsarecoloredingrey
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
tnuoC
Neural Networks Statistics Probabilistic
Dimensionality Reduction Support Vectors Tree
Figure14: TemporaldistributionofAImethodsoccurrenceinsurveyedarticles. Articlesusingmorethanone
method arecounted multipletimes, sothe numbersarenot consistentwith total numberof articlespublished
each year.
Neural Networks
Within this group, we consider all types of neural network architecture, from multilayer
perceptron (MLP) to deep learning methods. Before we dive into the details of the findings,
we want to clarify certain assumptions that were made to facilitate the analysis of methods
based on neural networks. We grouped similar NN approaches into larger groups; e.g. all
autoencoder-based methods such as Variational AE, Sparse AE, Denoising AE etc. were
categorized as ”AE” and so on. The only exception was in case of Recurrent Neural Networks
– due to the high number of articles related to this group of methods, we decided to treat
VanillaRNN,Long-Short-TermMemory(LSTM),andGated-RecurrentUnit(GRU)networks
separately. Ifthepaperdidnotspecifyexactlywhattypeofarchitecturewasused,weassumed
that the regular MLP model was employed. We observe that this is the case mainly in older
publications and in ones that use relatively simple ML methods.
The results are summarized in Tab. A.12. Although the highest number of studies use the
MLP architecture, which is based on the perceptron model, many of these works date back to
the 1990s and early 2000s (Dinghui Zhang et al., 2000; Marcu et al., 2004; Meneganti et al.,
1998; Ray, 1991). The substantial growth of articles related to NN is observed from 2020 and
22
is mainly related to research on more complex architectures such as RNNs, LSTMs, CNNs,
or GRUs. All these architectures are able to model complex temporal dependencies between
the features, which make them particularly useful for time-series data, which are commonly
used in the analyzed papers (for details, refer to Sect. 5.5). Additionally, CNNs are used in
image recognition, so they can be applied to tasks that involve image processing (Chernyi
et al., 2022; Fleischanderl et al., 2022; Latham and Giannetti, 2023). Another wide group
of methods are related to autoencoders, which can be used for unsupervised learning tasks
such as anomaly detection (Choi et al., 2023; Jakubowski et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2016a).
In addition to the approaches discussed above, we observe some examples of less recognized
strategies. Several researchers applied the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) together
with other ML methods to predict faults in the production process(Peng et al., 2023; Xie
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023b; Zhao et al., 2021). Another example of a generative model,
which is adapted to the PdM task, is the Deep Belief Network (DBN) (Ji et al., 2021; Jian-
liang et al., 2020). We also identified some articles that used the attention mechanism in
conjunction with CNN (Hao et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022a) and GRU (Wang et al., 2021a).
A notable example is the work of Han et al. (2022a), who combined BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) together with LSTM and the Graph Neural Network to construct a knowledge graph
for HRM. Another study, which uses the Transformer architecture, is the work of Ma et al.
(2023). Two authors employed the Double Deep Q Network (Hasselt et al., 2016) (DDQN),
which is used mainly for reinforcement learning tasks; Acernese et al. (2022) focused on fault
detection in the rolling stand, while Neto et al. (2021) used this approach to solve the main-
tenance scheduling problem. Other examples of neural network architectures used in the
surveyed papers include Restricted Boltzmann Machine (Dong et al., 2023; Liu and Zhang,
2023), RadialBasisFunctionNetwork(P´erezetal.,2013)andBroadLearningSystem(Zhang
et al., 2021a).
Support Vector Machines
Algorithms in the SVM family can generally be grouped into three main approaches,
depending on the type of ML task they solve. Support Vector Classifier (SVC) is used for
classification tasks, the Support Vector Regression (SVR) is applied for regression, and the
One-Class SVM (OCSVM) is a commonly adopted method for outlier detection. Except
for OCSVM, some authors use the Support Vector Data Descriptor (SVDD) for one-class
classification, but since these methods are closely connected and may be equivalent under
specific conditions (Xing and Li, 2020), we consider them as a single approach. The synthesis
of support vector-related papers is presented in Tab. A.14.
In classification tasks SVM approaches are widely adopted, with some studies proposing
extensions or modifications for improved performance (Liu et al., 2011b; Tian and Wang,
2010; Wang et al., 2010, 2015a). Most of these studies date back to the early 2010s. Another
group of studies combines SVM with other methods (Liu et al., 2011a; Lou et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2009). In regression approaches SVR was commonly used in comparative studies (Lu
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). Zhang et al. (2021c) used SVR in a semi-
supervised manner to detect outliers, while Liu and Gao (2015) proposed a combination of
SVM outlier detection with SVR to predict the quality of products in BF.
One-class classification methods based on SVM were often combined with other ML ap-
proaches (Ouyang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2018; Wang and Mao, 2018; Wang et al., 2022b;
Zhai et al., 2020). Furthermore, some articles utilized OCSVM in relatively simple scenarios,
withoutanycombinationswithdifferentmethodsormodificationsoftheoriginalmodel(Gerz
et al., 2022; Russo et al., 2021; Weber et al., 2022). In contrast, Zhang et al. (2022) proposed
probabilistic OCSVM for fault detection using SVM exclusively. Finally, Jiang et al. (2021)
used OCSVM as an outlier detector to find an optimal parity vector for a nonlinear system,
23
which was later used as a fault detector.
Probabilistic ML methods
In this group, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) were used in the highest number of stud-
ies, usuallyinconjunctionwithotheralgorithms(ChenandCai,2023;Hanetal.,2022b;Peng
et al., 2015, 2021; Xiao et al., 2023), but also as a standalone algorithm (Zhang et al., 2023c).
It should be noted that most of these studies have been published in the last 3 years, which
implies a growing interest in GMMs. Within the group of Gaussian-based approaches, a com-
bination of the Gaussian process and SVDD was proposed for outlier detection (Wang et al.,
2018), as well as the Gaussian-based anomaly detection method for time-series (Saci et al.,
2021). Many studies were conducted that used Bayesian principles, combining them with
other methods, i.e., dimensionality reduction (Ma et al., 2021a; Peng et al., 2016) or neural
networks (Fouka et al., 2021; Lian et al., 2010). Other approaches related to Bayesian infer-
ence include Bayesian Networks (Lian et al., 2010), Discrete Bayesian Filter (Ruiz-Sarmiento
et al., 2020) and Bayesian State Space Model (Zhang et al., 2023d). Bayesian inference was
also used in Lu et al. (2013) together with PCA for fault detection. Finally, several studies
showed the usability of Hidden Markov Models (Sarda et al., 2021; Simon et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2015b) and Causal Graph Models (Garcia-Beltran et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2021b) for
PdM tasks in the steel industry.
Tree-based
The research related to tree-based algorithms was mainly focused on ensemble methods,
that is, combining predictions of multiple weak learners to improve prediction accuracy and
generalization. A popular example of these methods is Random Forest, which was used in
several studies for comparative evaluation with other algorithms (Chen et al., 2020, 2021a;
Simi´c et al., 2014; Nkonyana et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023). Gradient Boosting Machines
(GBM) offer a general improvement in the ensemble-based methods, compared to random
forest. Of these methods, XGBoost stands out as the most widely used algorithm. Analog-
ically to Random Forest, it was used in comparative studies (Lu et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023), but also as a standalone prediction algorithm (Ding et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2020).
Liu et al. (2021) used LightGBM, which is another example of an algorithm for the GBM
family. Tiensuu et al. (2020) also used a GBM-based model, but did not specify the details
of the algorithm used. More novel approaches, utilizing gradient boosting, were proposed by
Xie et al. (2021) and Xu et al. (2024) – both studies combined XGBoost with deep learning
methods. On the other hand, we also identified a few papers that utilized the single deci-
sion tree as a prediction algorithm (Deb´on and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz, 2012; Simi´c et al., 2014;
Song et al., 2022). The algorithms discussed above were used in classification and regression
problems. However, tree-based ensembles can also be used for outlier detection tasks, which
was presented in the work by Gerz et al. (2022), who used Isolation Forest along with other
anomaly detection methods.
Clustering
Clusteringmethodsaregenerallyusedintasksthatrequireassemblingsimilarobservations
into larger groups; however, within the surveyed papers only Bo and Hao (2015) and Zhang
et al. (2018) followed this approach. We observe that the most popular direction of research
was to apply clustering methods in outlier detection tasks (Gerz et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2023;
Wang and Mao, 2018; Wu et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2014). Regarding the specific algorithms,
the methods utilized in multiple studies inlucded k-Means (Gerz et al., 2022; Shin and Kwon,
2018;WangandMao,2018)andAdaptiveFuzzyCMeans(Wuetal.,2021;Zhaoetal.,2014).
ShinandKwon(2018)consideredintheirworkalsoMean-shiftedclusteringanddensity-based
24
clustering. These approaches used the corresponding algorithms in their standard form or
combined them with other methods. Some novelties were introduced in the work of Zhang
et al. (2018) who improved the Order-Preserving Submatrix algorithm, Bo and Hao (2015)
who proposed the Qualitative Trend Clustering algorithm for fault diagnosis, and Jin et al.
(2023) who proposed an algorithm based on DBSCAN for anomaly detection.
5.3. Miscellaneous ML approaches
Within this section, we include all ML methods that do not fit well into any of the groups
discussed above.
Nearest Neighbors algorithm was widely used in conjunction with other methods. Some
authors combine this algorithm with other methods such as SVM (Liu et al., 2011a), slow
featuresanalysis(Dongetal.,2022), PCA(Zhangetal.,2016b), clustering(Zhaoetal.,2014)
and deep learning Ma et al. (2023). It is also used in simple comparative studies (Fu et al.,
2023; Mentouri et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023)
From the group of linear models, we identified two studies using logistic regression (Fu
et al., 2023; Shang et al., 2017) and one dedicated to generalized linear models (Deb´on and
Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz, 2012). We note that methods such as PCA and PLS, which can also be
categorized as linear models, were discussed in Sect. 5.3.
Original approach is presented in works of Ma et al. (2021b, 2022a), who proposed frame-
work for classification of coupling faults, which they refer as Multi-task learning (MTL). The
method integrates multiple kernel learning and dimensionality reduction methods.
Knowledge-based methods
In this section we briefly characterize minor, yet still important group of papers where
knowledge-based techniques (in a broad sense) were used. Rule-based expert systems were
usedinMiyabeetal.(1988)forsupervisionandcontrolsystem, theninRayandMurty(1989)
for maintenance management. In Ray (1991) authors proposed a hybrid architecture where a
high level rule-based component was used together with an MLP for fault diagnosis, In Slany
and Vascak (1996) a consistency checking strategy for diagnostical rule-based system is also
proposed, and in Dinghui Zhang et al. (2000) a hybrid fault diagnostic system is described.
Most recently a hybrid fuzzy neural system was described in B and Umesh (2019) for con-
dition monitoring. In the early 21st century fuzzy rule-based systems where proposed for
anomaly detection in Lisounkin et al. (2002), and in Bhattacharya et al. (2005) for failure
prevention. MorerecentpapersusingexpertsystemsincludeGaoetal.(2010),inChistyakova
and Novozhilova (2019) for maintenance management, and Spirin et al. (2020) for fault di-
agnosis. In the last decade, ontologies where also used with Zhang et al. (2012/09) for fault
diagnosis, Beden et al. (2021) where a domain ontology for cold rolling was proposed, and
thenlaterusedinBedenandBeckmann(2023)whereauthorscombineitwithanMLclassifier
for maintenance scheduling. In Cao et al. (2022) a more general core reference ontology for
steelmaking was described.
Statistical methods
Statistics-basedapproachesareadistinctfieldofscience, howevertheyarethedata-driven
alternative to some of the ML approaches. This fact, together with the high occurrence of
statistics-based methods in the selected articles, encouraged us to include them in our analy-
sis. Independent Component Analysis, with certain modifications, was applied by Tan et al.
(2010) and Fan et al. (2017); Fan and Zhang (2018). Other studies combined ICA with the
PCA method (Peng et al., 2014a,b; Wang et al., 2012; Yingwei Zhang et al., 2013; Zhou
et al., 2021). Zhang and Xi et al. extensively applied Fractional Brownian Motion in their
studies concerning the wall of BF (Xi et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2017a, 2019a,b, 2021b). Slow
25
Features Analysis was applied by Zhai et al. (2020) and Dong et al. (2022). Other statistical
methods applied in the surveyed studies include Canonical Correlation Analysis (Liu et al.,
2018a;Pengetal.,2014a;Wangetal.,2021b),CanonicalVariatesAnalysis(Louetal.,2023a),
Feature Selection (Oh and Kim, 2015), Least Squares (Zhang et al., 2017b), Statistical Trend
Decomposistion(Wuetal.,2021),PrincipalComponentPursuit(Panetal.,2016b,2018),Ma-
halanobisDistance(Anetal.,2020;ShinandKwon,2018)andGreyModel(Zhaoetal.,2022).
Some non-standard statistical tests were also applied, including Scheffe test (Lisounkin et al.,
2002) and Mann-Kandall test (Weng et al., 2023). We observed that statistical approaches
were predominantly used for outlier detection tasks in an unsupervised approach.
Dimensionality reduction
Similar to statistics, dimensionality reduction methods are not strictly an AI-based ap-
proach, but are widely used in data-driven studies to perform tasks such as preprocessing,
visualization, or outlier detection. The summary of studies that used the dimensionality re-
duction methods is presented in Tab. A.20. The PCA is the dominant approach that was
used in most studies concerning dimensionality reduction. It was mainly applied together
with other AI methods, generally as a preprocessing step (see Tab. A.20). The researchers
also combined PCA with other statistical methods, that is, ICA (Peng et al., 2014a,b; Wang
et al., 2012; Yingwei Zhang et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2021), CCA (Peng et al., 2014a) and the
Grey Model (Zhao et al., 2022). Several studies used PCA, PLS, or their modifications alone
(see Tab. A.20). In general, in these studies, the authors reduce the dimension of the data
and then compute the residual of each feature with respect to the projection, which is then
used as a measure of the anomaly; based on the value of the squared prediction error or the
test T2, outlier detection is performed. Furthermore, Peng et al. (2015, 2016); Zhang et al.
(2021a) and Chen et al. (2021a) combined PLS with other AI methods, e.g. probabilistic
models, trees, or statistical methods. Except for PCA-based and PLS-based studies, we iden-
tified only two studies that used other dimensionality reduction methods. P´erez et al. (2013)
used t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) with RBF Neural Network, and
Sha et al. (2022) utilized Neighborhood Preserving Embedding (NPE).
Other techniques
Within this section we describe miscellaneous methods, which do not fit into subfields
described in the above sections.
The first group of methods is related to optimization techniques. Most of the research
on these methods was related to hyperparameter tuning or improving the learning process
of the ML model. Several studies (Ji et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2023a; Qing Liu et al., 2016)
used Genetic Algorithms (GA) to find the optimal parameters of ML models, Zhang et al.
(2021c) used the Chaotic Sparrow Search Algorithm to optimize the parameters of the SVM,
Jakubowskietal. usedBayesianoptimizationtotunethehyperparametersoftheautoencoder
in two of their studies (Jakubowski et al., 2021a, 2022), and Yang et al. (2015) compared GA
with Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and grid search to tune the SVM model. Regarding
other applications of optimization methods, Wang et al. (2022a) utilized PSO to improve the
efficiency of the analytical model, and (Kovaˇciˇc et al., 2019) used Genetic Programming to
find the optimal mathematical model of roll wear.
Analytical models are the next category, which does not fall strictly into the group of AI
methods. The objective of these models is to simulate the behavior of the subject of study
with the means of physics-based equations and knowledge of the underlying processes. We
find that many of the identified studies, utilizing analytical models, were related to prediction
of roll wear in rolling mills (Anagiannis et al., 2020; Jakubowski et al., 2022; Lebru´n et al.,
2013; Yuan et al., 2023). Moreover, a wider scope of the hot rolling process was studied
26
by Lisounkin et al. (2002) and Krot et al. (2020). Another HRM use case is a study by
Wang and Peng (2023), who used the finite element method to monitor the laminar cooling
process. Studies in other steel production facilities included monitoring of hearth erosion of
BF (Wang et al., 2022a) and metal breakages in CCM (Luk’yanov et al., 2015). Some of
the discussed approaches, in addition to using an analytic model, also utilized AI methods.
Lisounkin (Lisounkin et al., 2002) used a fuzzy expert system to detect faults in the HRM,
Wang et al. (2022a) used PSO for optimizing their algorithm, Kim et al. (2006) created finite-
element simulation of ladle crane fatigue, which was later used to train neural network, and
Jakubowski et al. (2022) injected an analytical model of roll wear into the autoencoder.
In addition, we identified some studies, which used strictly signal processing methods
such as Fast Fourier Transform Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014); Fagarasan et al. (2004);
Shiyan et al. (2019) or Wavelet Transform Pan et al. (2016a); Sun et al. (2012). Although
these are not AI-based methods, they can serve as data preprocessing step and are valuable
tools, especially in case of high-frequency signals.
The use of Explainable AI methods
The analysis of the papers with regard to the use of interpretable or explainable models
showedthatonlyasmallnumberofstudiesaddressedthisissue. Weobservethattherearetwo
leading approaches to this matter. The first group used contribution plots, which illustrate
the impact of individual features on the prediction for a specific instance or observation in the
dataset. These plots were adoptedin several studies that usedstatistical methods (Guoet al.,
2023; Kumar and Das, 2022; Liu et al., 2018b; Zhang and Ma, 2011; Zhao et al., 2022) and
ML-based approaches (Han et al., 2022b). Second group utilized the SHAP (Lundberg and
Lee, 2017) method, which determines the contribution of each feature to the model output
based on Shapley values from cooperative game theory. This method was applied to explain
the prediction of the deep learning (Jakubowski et al., 2021a,b) and Gradient Boosting (Ding
et al., 2023; Tiensuu et al., 2020) methods. In addition, counterfactual explanations were
utilizedinonestudy(Jakubowskietal.,2022), inwhichanautoencodermodelwasdeveloped.
5.4. RQ3: What types of PdM approaches are used?
The analysis of papers with respect to the type of PdM approach followed is difficult
due to inconsistencies in the terminology used by the authors. Some authors do not clearly
use the common terminology, which we define in Sect. 2.1, but rather define the PdM task
using their own or less recognized terms. Other common issues include the usage of some
terms interchangeably or an imprecise definition of the PdM task employed. To maintain
objectivity, we have strictly adhered to the terminology used by the authors, but in some
cases (in which terminology was not explicitly used) the type of task was inferred based on
the provided information. However, it is important to note that inconsistencies persist.
Fig. 15 provides an overview of the frequency of different PdM tasks. Most research
articles focus on diagnostics, such as fault detection, fault diagnosis, and anomaly detection,
comprising approximately 70% of the research output. These tasks represent fundamental
concepts within the diagnostics domain. For a complete list of papers using these approaches,
we refer the reader to Tab. A.23. We observe certain ambiguities in the terminology used
by various authors in describing these tasks. In our opinion, this ambiguity arises from the
fact that these methods share overlapping characteristics, leading to subjective definitions
of tasks. For example, some studies employ an autoencoder architecture with reconstruction
error, whichisdescribedasanomalydetection(Jakubowskietal.,2021b;MeyerandMahalec,
2022; Zhou et al., 2022a) or fault detection (Lu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2016a, 2023b) in
different works. Similarly, some authors use the terms fault detection and fault diagnosis
together to describe their methods (Das, 2020; Lisounkin et al., 2002; Russo et al., 2021).
27
Process Monitoring Root Cause
3.1% Analysis Other
2.2% 3.6%
Condition Fault
Anomaly Detection Monitoring Scheduling Identification
15.2% Remaining 2.2% 1.8% 1.8%
Useful Life
9.4%
Defect Detection Health Estimation
2.7% 2.7%
Fault Detection Fault Diagnosis
34.8% 20.5%
Figure 15: Frequency of occurrence of different PdM tasks within the surveyed papers
Several authors claimed that their method applies more in-depth diagnostic tasks than
fault diagnosis. Liu et al. (2023) proposed a fault identification scheme based on autoen-
coders, which was applied for CCM. Zhou et al. (2020, 2021) used PCA-based and PLS-based
algorithms to calculate the deviation of the BF process from normal working conditions, then
fault identification was performed by estimating the contribution rate of each feature to this
deviation. Zhang et al. (2023a) proposed a framework to assess the operating level and iden-
tify HRM faults based on the GRU network. Zhang et al. (2021a) also proposed a fault
isolation method using PLS and the Broad Learning System to differentiate between different
types of fault in HRM. Fagarasan et al. (2004) developed a diagnostic agent that performs
fault detection and isolation based on the torsional vibration of a main drive in HRM.
Root Cause Analysis, being the most comprehensive diagnostic task, has also gained some
attentionfromresearchers. Tiensuuetal.(2020)proposedasystemtodiscovertherootcause
of center line deviation during steel strip processing, which is based on the GBM and SHAP
methods. Han et al. (2022b) used the graph neural network to diagnose faults in the BF
process. The inference mechanism was then built using contribution plots. Kumar and Das
(2022) studied fault diagnosis in the integrated steel factory, which was based on the neural
network and PCA, the root cause analysis of the faults was also performed using contribution
plots. Ma et al. (2022b) proposed a method for the analysis of the root cause in the HRM
finishing mill, which uses the GRU network and the Granger causality. Lastly, Latham and
Giannetti (2023) developed a tool, which combines expert knowledge and ML methods to
determine the root causes of width-related defects in the hot rolling process.
Process monitoring was explored in many studies, the methods within this group focused
mainly on the outlier detection, making them similar to anomaly detection tasks. These stud-
ies were devoted to monitoring the entire BF process (Chen and Cai, 2023; Liu et al., 2018b;
Zhang et al., 2018), and the finishing mill in the HRM (Peng et al., 2014a,b; Zhang et al.,
2023a). In some of them, the monitoring of the process was also performed in conjunction
with fault detection (Liu et al., 2018b; Peng et al., 2014a) or fault identification (Zhang et al.,
2023a). Condition monitoring was used in some articles and referred to tasks such as rolling
stand monitoring in CRM (Oh and Kim, 2015), torpedo car in BF (Yemelyanov et al., 2021),
hearth erosion in BF (Wang et al., 2022a) and transformer in EAF (Shiyan et al., 2019).
Defect detection, which monitors the degradation of the product, rather than the equip-
28
ment, was devoted only to the steel strip. Yang et al. (2023b) use visual data from the HRM
monitoring system to detect defects, while Fleischanderl et al. (2022) work with data from
the pickling line. Two of the works on the recognition of defects in steel strip did not specify
the manufacturing site (Hao et al., 2022; Simi´c et al., 2014). Song et al. (2022) and Liu and
Gao (2015) focused on the quality prediction of the product in HRM and BF, respectively,
which is closely related to defect detection.
The number of articles considering prognostics approach is much smaller than in the case
of diagnostics. Within this group, most of the studies were related to the estimation of RUL,
which represents approximately 10% of the articles. Zhang et al. (2017a, 2019b,a, 2021b) and
Xi et al. (2020) extensively explored this topic, focusing on predicting RUL of blast furnace
walls using fractional Brownian Motions. In one of the works, Zhang and Xi (2022) also used
RNN for a similar task. Within the BF area, Raducan et al. (2020) developed a method for
RUL estimation of blowers; however, no details on the method were provided. Several studies
were also dedicated to CCM, which considered bearings (Qing Liu et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2014), casting roller (Han et al., 2021). Moving on to HRM, the RUL of the work rolls was
a significant research area (Anagiannis et al., 2020; Jiao et al., 2021; Kovaˇciˇc et al., 2019),
but also a complete finishing mill (Krot et al., 2020). In addition, Goode et al. (2000) aimed
to predict the time for the next pump maintenance. Other studies considering the prediction
of RUL were dedicated to CRM (Lakshmanan et al., 2022; Lepenioti et al., 2020), crane in
steel plant (Kim et al., 2006), HDG line (Simon et al., 2021), and EAF (Choi et al., 2020).
Finally, Karagiorgou et al. (2020) developed the LSTM-based approach for the prediction of
RUL; however, they did not specify the exact steel facility under study.
The studies, which were aimed at estimating the HI, were primarily related to the mon-
itoring of individual devices. Many of these studies considered equipment in CCM, that is,
bearings (Qing Liu et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2014) and crystallizer (David et al., 2012). Other
works were dedicated to rolls in rolling mills; more precisely, to backup rolls in HRM (Yuan
etal.,2023), workrollsinHRM(Lebru´netal.,2013)andtheworkrollsinCRM(Foukaetal.,
2021). Ruiz-Sarmiento et al. (2020) also tried to predict the health condition of the asset,
in this case the equipment in Steckel HRM, but referred to it as a prediction of degradation
state. Similarly, Chen et al. (2021a) do not explicitly use the term HI, but their method,
which predicts bearing wear, is equivalent to calculating HI.
The research on scheduling tasks, which seems to be an important aspect of PdM from
a business perspective, was very limited. Ray and Murty (1989) developed an expert system
for a steel industry, which generates maintenance rules based on the knowledge base. It
does not provide automatic scheduling; however, it supports engineers in scheduling proper
maintenancetasks. Hollowayetal.(1991)proposedanintegratedapproachforfaultdetection
and reactive production scheduling in CCM. We note that these papers date back to around
1990. From more recent work, Neto et al. (2021) developed a reinforcement learning method
to optimize the maintenance schedule of the shredder in the steel plant.
5.5. RQ4: What are the characteristics of the data used?
In AI research, the characteristics of the data are one of the most important factors that
determine the feasibility of the proposed approach. Within this research question, our aim is
to determine these characteristics with respect to three factors. First, we analyzed the data
types used for PdM tasks in the steel industry. Then, we assessed the source of the data, with
the focus on its authenticity, that is, whether it is an artificial or real-world data set. Lastly,
we inspect the availability of the data to other researchers, which is one of the crucial aspects
supporting the reproducibility and comparison of the AI methods.
29
Data types
The type of data used plays an important role in determining the optimal AI method and
thePdMapproach. Thevolumeandqualityofthedatahaveahighimpactontheperformance
ofthemodelandcanrestricttheselectionofpotentialmethods. Fig.16presentsthefrequency
ofusingdifferenttypesofdatainthearticlessurveyed. Weidentifiedfourtypesofdata,which
were used: time series, tabular, image, and text.
Tabular Image Text
12.0% 6.0% 1.1%
Time-series
80.9%
Figure 16: Frequency of using different data formats by researchers
The primary type of data used is time series, where the information is generated sequen-
tially over time. This mainly involves data from sensor readings that are installed in the
facilities. Such data can be easily processed and stored in the form of files or databases. We
observe that algorithms that are able to learn temporal relationships are often used for this
task. This includes mainly deep learning approaches, e.g., LSTM Networks (Jiao et al., 2021;
Karagiorgou et al., 2020; Lakshmanan et al., 2022; Lepenioti et al., 2020), GRUs (Li et al.,
2023b; Wang et al., 2021a; Wu et al., 2023), CNNs (Gao et al., 2023; Liu and Hao, 2021; Peng
et al., 2022), but also statistical (Zhang et al., 2017a, 2019a,b) and probabilistic (Saci et al.,
2021) approaches. Alternatively, time-series data can be treated similarly to tabular data,
i.e., assuming no temporal dependency between the observations. In such scenarios, popular
MLapproachessuchasGradientBoosting(Liuetal.,2021;Wangetal.,2023), SVM(Konishi
and Nakano, 2010; Liu and Gao, 2015; Russo et al., 2021) can be utilized, but we lose the
temporal information, which might be relevant for certain use cases.
Tabular data was also adopted, as similarly to time-series, it comes primarily from sensor
readings. Usually, the difference is that it contains aggregated measurements for a certain
product (Deb´on and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz, 2012; Ding et al., 2023; Jakubowski et al., 2022;
Nkonyana et al., 2019; Tiensuu et al., 2020) instead of raw sensor readings. Except for
product-based measurements, approaches that use tabular data include sampling of measure-
ments to create a balanced data set (Liu et al., 2011a; Wang et al., 2010), using recorded
maintenance data (Kovaˇciˇc et al., 2019) or fusing information in tabular form with other data
structures (Jakubowski et al., 2021b; Meyer and Mahalec, 2022; Wang et al., 2020).
Several studies used visual data in the form of images to develop PdM solutions. These
studies are heavily based on the use of CNN architecture to process the data. Furthermore,
they are predominantly related to inspection of the steel strip surface (Fleischanderl et al.,
2022; Hao et al., 2022; Jing et al., 2023a; Mentouri et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023b). Anothersourceofimagedataisrecordingsfromcameras,whichareinstalledincritical
areas of the facilities. This approach was applied to torpedo cars (Chernyi et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2020), BF raceway (Puttinger and Stocker, 2019) and HRM (Junichi and Yukinori,
2020). Despite the images from regular cameras, which were described above, an interesting
possibility is to use images containing other than strictly visual information. Some examples
include an infrared camera, which produces a thermogram of the observed object (Emelianov
etal.,2022)andmeasurementsfroma3Dscannerequippedwithanultrasonicprobe(Bonikila
30
et al., 2022). A completely different approach was adopted by Latham and Giannetti (2023),
who converted time-series data into images.
Lastly, data in the form of text can also be used, although the research within this area
is very limited, as we identified only two studies that addressed it. The work of Han et al.
(2022a)usesvariousdeeplearningarchitecturestobuildaknowledgegraphforfaultdiagnosis
based on the reports of workshop maintenance personnel. Wang et al. (2020) combined text
and tabular data to detect faults related to steel surface quality; the textual description of
the defect was used to determine the labels for a classification model.
Data sources
With respect to the authenticity of the data, we observe that most of the studies were
conducted on real measurements from a steel manufacturing facility. Several authors also
used synthetic data (not necessarily related to the steel industry) for the sake of performance
assessment(Garcia-Beltranetal.,2004;Hanetal.,2022b;Jakubowskietal.,2021a;Louetal.,
2023b). We also identified studies in which the actual data from the installations was used
to train the model, but the validation was performed on synthetically manipulated data (Pan
et al., 2016b; Xie et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021c).
The use of synthetic data was also adopted in many studies. This involves, for example,
simulated data coming from mathematical model (Chen et al., 2023; Konishi and Nakano,
2010; Miyabe et al., 1988), digital twin (Han et al., 2021) or image data which do not come
from an actual installation (Fleischanderl et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023b).
The alternative approach to utilization of data from real production line is to conduct a
laboratory experiment and use these data for research. This approach was adopted mainly
for a cold rolling process (Ji et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2022a,b; Wang et al., 2023).
Availability of the data used
To complete the analysis on the characteristics of the data used, we determined its avail-
ability to other researchers. We did not find any work making the utilized data publicly
available as an appendix to the published paper. We believe that main reason for that may
be the confidentiality of the data coming from the private steel companies. In total, we found
three publicly available datasets, which are dedicated to steel production and were used by
the authors of the articles surveyed. UCI Steel Plates Defects (Buscema et al., 2010) contains
tabular data with measurements for a particular product together with the corresponding
defect class and was applied to validate rather simple ML approaches (Simi´c et al., 2014;
Nkonyana et al., 2019). NEU Surface Defect Database (Song and Yan, 2013; NEU) and the
Severstal Steel Defect Detection Dataset (Severstal) both contain images with steel surface
defects. They were used to show the effectiveness of deep learning methods for defect detec-
tion in steel plates (Hao et al., 2022; Mentouri et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2023; Yang et al.,
2023b). Finally, Wang et al. (2023) used data from a laboratory experiment, which can be
shared on reasonable request.
5.6. RQ5: What is the business impact of the proposed methods?
The business perspective of research in the steel industry plays a crucial role in the de-
velopment of new methodologies and the improvement of existing ones. The verification of
the proposed methods in industrial scenarios, where a significant number of difficulties might
be observed, is invaluable. First, it ensures that the proposed methods are operational in
the real installation and can tackle difficulties such as real-time prediction capability, concept
drifts, or low data quality. Second, the final objective of PdM methods is to reduce downtime,
costs, and increase asset safety and reliability. From such a perspective, the evaluation of the
business gains for the proposed methods seems like an imperative step.
31
To measure the business impact of the articles surveyed, we defined three distinct criteria.
First, we checked if there was any sign of collaboration with the industry. Some examples of
collaboration include 1) the authors stated that they worked together with plant engineers or
used their expert knowledge, 2) at least one author was affiliated to a steel-related company,
and3)thenameofcompanywasusedwithinthetextofthepaper. Thismeansthatusingthe
data from a real production facility does not imply that there was any collaboration between
the authors and the company, which shared the production data. Second, we verified that
the proposed solution was actually implemented in the real production environment. This
criterion is more strict than the first one and requires the authors to clearly indicate that
the method they proposed is actually operating in the facility. Finally, we checked whether
the authors gave a quantitative estimate of the business benefits of the implementation of
their method. This criterion does not oblige the method to be implemented in the production
facility, so if rough estimates based on reasonable assumptions are given, the criterion is still
fulfilled. ThesummaryofthearticlesthatmetatleastoneofthecriteriaisgiveninTab.A.24.
Despite the decent number of papers that showed evidence of collaboration, only a limited
number of papers highlight the successful implementation of the method. Holloway et al.
(1991) are the first researchers identified who implemented an AI-based PdM solution for a
steel factory. Their work was dedicated to CCM, and a prototype of the behavioral model
monitoring system was implemented on a MicroVax II computer. Lisounkin et al. (2002)
developed an analytical model combined with the fuzzy expert system to detect anomalies in
the selected elements of HRM rolling stands. Garcia-Beltran et al. (2004) developed a causal
graph model for the hydraulic looper, the model runs in a dedicated application. Bouhouche
et al. (2005) implemented a fault detection system on a process computer for a loop control
systemonthepicklingline. Bhattacharyaetal.(2005)usedfuzzylogictopreventbreakdowns
inCCM.Thesystemisoperatinginaproductionenvironmentandreplacedanoldersolution.
Kim et al. (2006) developed a Web-based Enterprise Resource Planning system to monitor
the condition of the ladle crane. Shigemori (2013) proposed a quality monitoring system for
various steel production processes, which was operated for c.a. 3 years before the results were
published. Luk’yanov et al. (2015) implemented an analytical model for the prediction of
liquid metal breakouts in CCM, which operated for more than a year. Shin and Kwon (2018)
developed a smart monitoring system to diagnose the CRM condition and implemented it
in the form of a Human-Machine Interface, allowing real-time display based on sensor data.
Tiensuu et al. (2020) implemented a Web-based tool for online monitoring and root cause
analysis for strip position deviation in HRM. Raducan et al. (2020) applied ML methods
to predict the RUL of turbo blowers in BF, the solution was implemented as a PowerBI
application. Chen et al. (2021a) applied PLS for bearing wear prediction and implemented
it as a web application. Wang et al. (2022a) designed an analytical model that monitors the
erosion process in the hearth of BF. The results of the model are displayed to the plant staff
tooptimizetheproductionprocessandmaintenancestrategy. Pengetal.(2021)implemented
a graphical user interface to monitor strip thickness faults in HRM. Panagou et al. (2022a)
developed a digital twin-based PdM solution, which was implemented as a web platform. Jin
et al. (2023) proposed an ML method for anomaly detection and applied it at the energy
management center of the steel company. Furthermore, Han et al. (2021) declare that they
have implemented a prototype based on digital twin for CCM; however, there are no details
on collaboration with any specific steel enterprise.
Inthecontextofbusinessgainsfromtheproposedmethods,onlyafewstudieswereidenti-
fied, whichshowedevidenceofaquantitativeevaluation. Luk’yanovetal.(2015)reportedthe
performance of their method after implementation: within 1.5 years of operation, the system
detected 44 probable cases of failure while significantly reducing the number of false alarms,
compared with the regular diagnostic system. Han et al. (2021) claim that their solution,
32
based on digital twin, which predicts RUL for a casting roller in CCM, improves service time
by 10-15% and increases steel production by 23%. Choi et al. (2023) evaluated the financial
costs of laser welder failure in HDG. Based on the duration of stoppage, the productivity of
line, and assumed hourly profit, they estimated that the model can help avoid a loss of about
23,000 USD per year. This value can increase to 400,000 USD / year if the method is applied
to other installations of the collaborated enterprise.
6. Discussion
The analysis of the articles included in the survey can help us determine the current stage,
gaps and perspectives in the research area of AI-driven PdM in the steel industry.
6.1. Summary of the findings
Below, we present the list of the main findings based on the results of our survey. We
believe that they give a global picture of current state of knowledge in the field.
First of all, the number of papers published in recent years has been growing constantly,
which implies increased interest of the scientific community in the field. Research on steel
facilities spans the whole production pipeline, from the sinter plant to the galvanizing lines.
However, a major research activity is observed in the hot-rolling and BF processes. The scope
of research ranges from the monitoring of single devices to the whole production process. The
equipment, which is subject of study varies from general-purpose devices, e.g. bearings,
gearboxes, to industry-specific equipment like loopers and work rolls.
TheterminologyusedtodescribePdMtasksisoftenvagueandcertaintypesoftaskshave
overlying characteristics. This impedes the analysis of the papers with respect to the type
of task addressed. The highest number of papers are related to the prediction of faults with
varying degree of profoundness, ranging from simple detection to more in-depth root cause
analysis. Examples of more unconventional PdM approaches include the estimation of the
health state or remaining useful life, and the scheduling of maintenance actions.
As of analysis methods used, most of the work is devoted to the development of ML
methods to perform various PdM tasks, the presence of other AI methods is very limited. A
relatively high number of papers use unsupervised techniques, which do not require labeled
dataduringtraining. Webelievethatthemaincausesofsuchsituationarethehighimbalance
of data (between faulty and normal observations) and the lack of high-quality labels. The
increased amount of research in recent years is mainly dedicated to the development of deep
learning methods. There has been also a small number of papers where knowledge based
technologies, mainly expert systems, were used. However, besides recent work on the use of
formal ontologies, this trend is of a marginal importance. Finally, even though XAI has been
ahottopicinAIforalmostedecade, sofarlittleefforthasbeenmadetoprovideexplanations
for model decisions using XAI techniques.
Data treatment is another important aspect to observe. Most of the papers are based on
data collected from sensors installed in the facilities. However, often a temporal dependency
between the observations is not taken into account (data treatment is similar to tabular
data). We noted that several methods were proposed to deal with image and text data, which
might be a promising research direction given the development of deep learning methods for
computer vision and natural language processing. Most of the researchers use private data,
whichcomesfromarealsteelproductionfacility. Theuseofsuchdataenhancestheusefulness
of the proposed methods in practice but also hinders the possibility of reproducing the results
andcomparingthemwithalternativeapproaches. Thereisverylittlepublicdataavailablefor
researchers to benchmark their solutions in steel industry use cases. We identified only three
such datasets, two of which are related to image processing and one being relatively simple
33
tabular data. Moreover, the authors, with only one exception, do not provide the source code
produced to conduct research. The proposed methods are therefore difficult to reproduce and
validate, which is even more difficult taking into account the lack of research data.
The research is mainly devoted to existing installations, whose location is usually not
revealed in the paper. However, based on the available data, we observe that the location
is generally aligned with the affiliation of authors. Chinese universities occupy a dominant
position in terms of the number of articles published. Significant research activity is also
present in developed countries, especially in western Europe. This generally aligns with
global steel production data (Basson, 2023). Two larger clusters of researchers from Chinese
universities conducted exceptionally high research activity. Except for these two cases, all
other research teams worked independently.
Finally, while the collaboration of researchers with companies is clearly visible, the ob-
servable results of these works are very limited. Only a limited number of studies declare that
theirmethodwasimplementedintheproductionenvironment. Thequantitativebenefitswere
presented in very few papers.
6.2. Gaps and future directions
While research on the application of AI methods for PdM in the steel industry has been
extensive and has explored various methods and facilities, there remains ample room for
improvement. Throughouranalysis,wehaveidentifiedcurrenttrendsandgapsthatwebelieve
should guide future research. In the following, we highlight the most important directions
that should be considered by both academia and businesses.
• At present, substantial research efforts are directed towards BF technology. However,
accordingtoexistingregulationsandtheenvironmentalobjectivesoutlinedbythemajor
steel producers (for Internal Policies of the Union. and Trinomics., 2021; Yang et al.,
2023a; Yu and Tan, 2022), it is expected that BF undergoes gradual decommissioning
in favor of less emission-intensive processes such as EAF. Consequently, we project an
increase in interest towards PdM within the EAF process.
• The major growth of research in deep learning will probably continue, as the new ar-
chitectures and methods offer high versatility and efficiency, which can encourage re-
searchers to continue studies in this direction. Additionally, significant advances in the
fieldsofcomputervisionandnaturallanguageprocessingcouldpossiblyleadtoahigher
number of papers, which utilize data from maintenance reports or industrial cameras.
Currently, we observe only limited research in this area.
• Little attention was paid to the interpretability of the proposed solutions and the use
of XAI methods. The steel industry, which is a critical branch of the economy, as well
as a hazardous workplace, requires robust and faithful solutions, so that end-users can
trust the prediction of AI models. This can be enhanced if the methods used provide
explanations of their decisions.
• Current research is mainly focused on discovering faults or anomalies in the machinery.
This approach should decrease the possibility of incoming failures, but does not neces-
sarily improve regular maintenance strategies. We argue that more effort should be put
into optimizing regular maintenance tasks, so that the share of preventive maintenance
actions also decreases.
• The transparency and reproducibility of studies should be increased by making the data
used for more accessible. While it would be preferable to use data from real production
34
facilities, the intellectual property rights possessed by the companies will probably pre-
ventthis. Similarly,thepublicavailabilityofthesourcecodeswouldsupportresearchers
and engineers in the implementation and validation of the proposed methods.
• More effort from researchers should be put into the implementation and evaluation of
the methods from a business perspective. The use of AI methods in PdM is a strongly
applied field of research; therefore, observable results of the studies should be one of
the main priorities. This could be achieved by fostering stronger cooperation between
researchers and maintenance engineers.
• Most researchers work within small, independent teams, lacking substantial collabora-
tion with other scientific groups. We believe that cooperation among these research
teams has the potential to enhance the overall quality of scientific works.
7. Summary
In this survey we conducted a comprehensive analysis of research articles related to the
application of AI methods in PdM within the steel industry. We systematically reviewed and
collected 219 research articles related to this field. The articles were selected from a pop-
ulation of more than 2000 articles, retrieved based on a carefully prepared set of keywords
related to AI, PdM, and the steel industry. The selection process was carried out by inde-
pendent reviewers, following the PRISMA methodology, to ensure the inclusion of the most
relevant studies. Based on the set of diverse research questions, we in-depthly analyzed the
characteristics of all papers, taking into account different dimensions of the research, as well
as the characteristics of the data used, along with the business impact of proposed methods.
We believe that this analysis should allow readers to gain insight into different aspects of the
subject and be a valuable source of knowledge for both researchers willing to explore the field
and practitioners desiring to implement AI methods in their facilities. In this work we did
not use any Generative AI tools. All our analyses were conducted manually based on our
expertise and with use of automation procedures we programmed.
Despite the fact that the focus of our survey was on AI-based methods, we also included
several papers from related fields such as statistics, signal processing, and analytical models,
to provide a more comprehensive view on the subject of the study. We observed an increasing
interest of researchers in the area of AI-based PdM in the steel industry, with a primary
focus on the development of deep learning methods. Research spanned all areas of the steel
industry, from sintering to galvanization, but the most attention was devoted to the Hot
Rolling Mill and Blast Furnace. The vast majority of articles used data from sensor readings
installed in manufacturing sites, but data in the form of text or images can also be useful in
the development of PdM solutions. Although a large number of studies were conducted, we
observed relatively low practical implications in terms of their impact on business.
In summary, this survey confirms that AI-based PdM can bring substantial benefits to the
steel industry, including improved operational efficiency, reduced downtime, and improved
quality, but the development of intelligent solutions remains a challenging task that requires
further studies. Most importantly, future research should focus on the business aspects of
the proposed methods as well as on their practical implications. In particular, a broader
perspective of the subject should be adopted, allowing for the consideration of a specific PdM
solution within the maintenance strategy. Ultimately, the primary goal of PdM is to provide
measurable benefits to the efficiency of the steel industry.
35
Acknowledgements
ProjectXPMissupportedbytheNationalScienceCentre,Poland(2020/02/Y/ST6/00070),
under CHIST-ERA IV programme, which has received funding from the EU Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Programme, under Grant Agreement no 857925.
CRediT author statement
Jakub Jakubowski: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation,DataCuration,Writing-OriginalDraft,VisualizationNatalia Wojak-Strzelecka:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing -
Original Draft, Visualization Rita P. Ribeiro: Conceptualization, Writing - Original Draft
Sepideh Pashami: Conceptualization, Writing - Original Draft Szymon Bobek: Valida-
tion, Writing - Review & Editing Jo˜ao Gama: Conceptualization, Validation, Writing -
Review & Editing Grzegorz J. Nalepa: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writ-
ing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition
References
Acernese, A., Sarda, K., Nole, V., Manfredi, L., Greco, L., Glielmo, L., Del Vecchio, C.,
2021. Robust Statistics-based Anomaly Detection in a Steel Industry, in: 2021 29th
Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), IEEE, PUGLIA, Italy.
pp. 1058–1063. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9480311/, doi:10.1109/
MED51440.2021.9480311.
Acernese, A., Yerudkar, A., Del Vecchio, C., 2022. A Novel Reinforcement Learning-based
Unsupervised Fault Detection for Industrial Manufacturing Systems, in: 2022 American
Control Conference (ACC), IEEE, Atlanta, GA, USA. pp. 2650–2655. URL: https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9867763/, doi:10.23919/ACC53348.2022.9867763.
Alabdallah, A., Pashami, S., R¨ognvaldsson, T., Ohlsson, M., 2022. Survshap: A proxy-
based algorithm for explaining survival models with shap, in: 2022 IEEE 9th International
Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 1–10. doi:10.1109/
DSAA54385.2022.10032392.
An, R., Yang, C., Pan, Y., 2020. Graph-BasedMethodforFaultDetectionintheIron-Making
Process. IEEE Access 8, 40171–40179. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9015995/, doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2976808.
Anagiannis, I., Nikolakis, N., Alexopoulos, K., 2020. Energy-Based Prognosis of the Remain-
ing Useful Life of the Coating Segments in Hot Rolling Mill. Applied Sciences 10, 6827.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/19/6827, doi:10.3390/app10196827.
Arinton,E.,Caraman,S.,Korbicz,J.,2012. Neuralnetworksformodellingandfaultdetection
of the inter-stand strip tension of a cold tandem mill. Control Engineering Practice 20,
684–694. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066112000640,
doi:10.1016/j.conengprac.2012.03.007.
B, G., Umesh, K.N., 2019. Condition Monitoring of Air Compressor in Steel Industry using
ANFIS. InternationalJournalofMechanicalandProductionEngineeringResearchandDe-
velopment 9, 485–498. URL: http://tjprc.org/publishpapers/2-67-1552296940-47.
IJMPERDAPR201947.pdf, doi:10.24247/ijmperdapr201947.
36
Basson, E., 2023. World Steel in Figures. Technical Report. World Steel Association. URL:
https://unesid.org/descargas_files/World-Steel-in-Figures-2023.pdf.
Beden, S., Beckmann, A., 2023. Towards an Ontological Framework for Integrating Do-
main Expert Knowledge with Random Forest Classification, in: 2023 IEEE 17th In-
ternational Conference on Semantic Computing (ICSC), IEEE, Laguna Hills, CA, USA.
pp. 221–224. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10066787/, doi:10.1109/
ICSC56153.2023.00043.
Beden, S., Cao, Q., Beckmann, A., 2021. SCRO: A Domain Ontology for Describing Steel
Cold Rolling Processes towards Industry 4.0. Information 12, 304. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/2078-2489/12/8/304, doi:10.3390/info12080304.
Bhattacharya, A.K., Srinivas, P.S., Chithra, K., Jatla, S.V., Das, J., 2005. Recogni-
tion of Fault Signature Patterns Using Fuzzy Logic for Prevention of Breakdowns in
Steel Continuous Casting Process, in: Hutchison, D., Kanade, T., Kittler, J., Klein-
berg, J.M., Mattern, F., Mitchell, J.C., Naor, M., Nierstrasz, O., Pandu Rangan, C.,
Steffen, B., Sudan, M., Terzopoulos, D., Tygar, D., Vardi, M.Y., Weikum, G., Pal,
S.K., Bandyopadhyay, S., Biswas, S. (Eds.), Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelli-
gence. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. volume 3776, pp. 318–324. URL:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/11590316_47, doi:10.1007/11590316_47.
Bo, Z., Hao, Y., 2015. Qualitativetrendclusteringofprocessdataforfaultdiagnosis, in: 2015
IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), IEEE,
Gothenburg, Sweden. pp. 1584–1588. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
7294327/, doi:10.1109/CoASE.2015.7294327.
Bonikila, P.R., Indimath, S.S., Shajan, N., 2022. Failure assessment of Mash Seam Weld
breakage and development of online weld inspection system for early detection of weld
failure. Engineering Failure Analysis 133, 105967. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1350630721008281, doi:10.1016/j.engfailanal.2021.105967.
Bouhouche, S., Lahreche, M., Ziani, S., Bast, J., 2005. Fault Detection and Monitoring of
LengthLoopControlSysteminPicklingProcess,in: InternationalConferenceonComputa-
tional Intelligence for Modelling, Control and Automation and International Conference on
IntelligentAgents,WebTechnologiesandInternetCommerce(CIMCA-IAWTIC’06),IEEE,
Vienna, Austria. pp. 642–647. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1631336/,
doi:10.1109/CIMCA.2005.1631336.
Bouhouche, S., Lahreche, M., Ziani, S., Bast, J., 2006. Quality Classification and Monitoring
Using Adaptive Metric Distance and Neural Networks: Application in Pickling Process, in:
PROCEEDINGS OF WORLD ACADEMY OF SCIENCE, ENGINEERING AND TECH-
NOLOGY, VOL 14, pp. 439+.
Buscema, M., Terzi, S., Tastle, W., 2010. Steel Plates Faults. UCI Machine Learning Repos-
itory. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C5J88N.
Cao, Q., Beden, S., Beckmann, A., 2022. A core reference ontology for steelmaking pro-
cess knowledge modelling and information management. Computers in Industry 135,
103574. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0166361521001810,
doi:10.1016/j.compind.2021.103574.
Carvalho, T.P., Soares, F.A.A.M.N., Vita, R., da P. Francisco, R., Basto, J.P., Alcala, S.G.S.,
2019. A systematic literature review of machine learning methods applied to predictive
37
maintenance. Computers & Industrial Engineering 137, 106024. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360835219304838, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2019.106024.
Cemernek, D., Cemernek, S., Gursch, H., Pandeshwar, A., Leitner, T., Berger, M.,
Kl¨osch, G., Kern, R., 2022. Machine learning in continuous casting of steel: a state-
of-the-art survey. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 33, 1561 – 1579. URL: https:
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85103107076&doi=10.1007%
2fs10845-021-01754-7&partnerID=40&md5=c3c959a1bdbe990c72f95ddab1f4de84,
doi:10.1007/s10845-021-01754-7. cited by: 26.
Chandola, V., Banerjee, A., Kumar, V., 2009. Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput.
Surv. 41. doi:10.1145/1541880.1541882.
Chemweno, P., Morag, I., Sheikhalishahi, M., Pintelon, L., Muchiri, P., Wakiru, J., 2016. De-
velopment of a novel methodology for root cause analysis and selection of maintenance
strategy for a thermal power plant: A data exploration approach. Engineering Fail-
ure Analysis 66, 19–34. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1350630716301248, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2016.04.001.
Chen, C., Cai, J., 2023. A Hybrid Cluster Variational Autoencoder Model for Monitoring
the Multimode Blast Furnace System. Processes 11, 2580. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2227-9717/11/9/2580, doi:10.3390/pr11092580.
Chen, H., Li, L., Shang, C., Huang, B., 2023. FaultDetectionforNonlinearDynamicSystems
With Consideration of Modeling Errors: A Data-Driven Approach. IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics 53, 4259–4269. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9756636/,
doi:10.1109/TCYB.2022.3163301.
Chen, X., Van Hillegersberg, J., Topan, E., Smith, S., Roberts, M., 2021a. Application of
data-driven models to predictive maintenance: Bearing wear prediction at TATA steel.
Expert Systems with Applications 186, 115699. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0957417421010836, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115699.
Chen, Z., Liu,Y., Valera-Medina, A., Robinson, F., 2020. AMulti-sourceFeature-levelFusion
Approach for Predicting Strip Breakage in Cold Rolling, in: 2020 IEEE 16th International
Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), IEEE, Hong Kong, Hong
Kong. pp. 482–487. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9216854/, doi:10.
1109/CASE48305.2020.9216854.
Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Valera-Medina, A., Robinson, F., Packianather, M., 2021b. Multi-faceted
modelling for strip breakage in cold rolling using machine learning. International Journal
of Production Research 59, 6347–6360. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/00207543.2020.1812753, doi:10.1080/00207543.2020.1812753.
Chernyi, S., Emelianov, V., Zinchenko, E., Zinchenko, A., Tsvetkova, O., Mishin, A., 2022.
Application of Artificial Intelligence Technologies for Diagnostics of Production Struc-
tures. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 10, 259. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/2077-1312/10/2/259, doi:10.3390/jmse10020259.
Chistyakova,T.,Novozhilova,I.,2019. IntellectualSystemforResource-SavingRepairControl
of Refractory Lining of the Oxygen Converter, in: 2019 XXI International Conference
Complex Systems: Control and Modeling Problems (CSCMP), IEEE, Samara, Russia.
38
pp. 108–111. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8976655/, doi:10.1109/
CSCMP45713.2019.8976655.
Choi, J.S., Choi, S.W., Lee, E.B., 2023. Modeling of Predictive Maintenance Systems for
Laser-Welders in Continuous Galvanizing Lines Based on Machine Learning with Welder
Control Data. Sustainability 15, 7676. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/9/
7676, doi:10.3390/su15097676.
Choi, Y., Kwun, H., Kim, D., Lee, E., Bae, H., 2020. Method of Predictive Maintenance for
Induction Furnace Based on Neural Network, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp), IEEE, Busan, Korea (South). pp. 609–612.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9070715/, doi:10.1109/BigComp48618.
2020.00021.
Das, A., 2020. Multivariate Statistical Process Monitoring Strategy for a Steel Making Shop,
in: Deepak, B., Parhi, D., Jena, P.C. (Eds.), Innovative Product Design and Intelligent
Manufacturing Systems. Springer Singapore, Singapore, pp. 971–978. URL: http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-981-15-2696-1_94, doi:10.1007/978-981-15-2696-1_94.
David, J., Sˇvec, P., Frischer, R., 2012. Modelling of crystallizer wear. Archives of Materials
Science and Engineering 58, 193–198.
Deb´on, A., Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz, J., 2012. Fault diagnosis and comparing risk for the steel coil
manufacturing process using statistical models for binary data. Reliability Engineering &
System Safety 100, 102–114. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0951832012000026, doi:10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.022.
Dehghan Marvasti, F., Samet, H., 2014. Fault detection in the secondary side of electric arc
furnace transformer using the primary side data: FAULT DETECTION IN THE SEC-
ONDARY SIDE OF EAF TRANSFORMER. International Transactions on Electrical En-
ergy Systems 24, 1419–1433. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/
etep.1783, doi:10.1002/etep.1783.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv:1810.04805.
Ding, C., Sun, J., Li, X., Peng, W., Zhang, D., 2023. A high-precision and transparent step-
wisediagnosticframeworkforhot-rolledstripcrown. JournalofManufacturingSystems71,
144–157. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0278612523001899,
doi:10.1016/j.jmsy.2023.09.007.
Dinghui Zhang, Shuguang Dai, Youqin Zheng, Renjie Zhang, Ping’an Mu, 2000. Re-
searches and application of a hybrid fault diagnosis expert system, in: Proceedings of the
3rd World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (Cat. No.00EX393), IEEE,
Hefei, China. pp. 215–219. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/859951/,
doi:10.1109/WCICA.2000.859951.
Dong, J., Wang, Y., Peng, K., 2022. A Novel Fault Detection Method Based on the Extrac-
tion of Slow Features for Dynamic Nonstationary Processes. IEEE Transactions on Instru-
mentation and Measurement 71, 1–11. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9656813/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2021.3136260.
Dong, Q.q., Qian, Q.t., Li, M., Xu, G., 2023. Monitoringanddiagnosisofcomplexproduction
process based on free energy of Gaussian–Bernoulli restricted Boltzmann machine. Journal
39
ofIronandSteelResearchInternational30, 971–984. URL:https://link.springer.com/
10.1007/s42243-022-00867-4, doi:10.1007/s42243-022-00867-4.
van Eck, N.J.v., Waltman, L., 2010. Software survey: Vosviewer, a computer pro-
gram for bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics 84. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11192-009-0146-3, doi:10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3.
Egorova, E., Rudakova, I., Rusinov, L., Vorobjev, N., 2018. Diagnostics of sintering processes
onthebasisofPCAandtwo-levelneuralnetworkmodel: DIAGNOSTICSOFSINTERING
PROCESSES. JournalofChemometrics32,e2959. URL:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/cem.2959, doi:10.1002/cem.2959.
Emelianov, V., Chernyi, S., Zinchenko, A., Emelianova, N., Zinchenko, E., Chernobai, K.,
2022. Information System for Diagnosing the Condition of the Complex Structures Based
on Neural Networks. Energies 15, 2977. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/9/
2977, doi:10.3390/en15092977.
Fagarasan, I., Taleb, S., Lesecq, S., Gentil, S., Stuecher, R., 2004. Signal-Based Diagnosis
of Torsional Vibration of a Hot Rolling Mill Main Drive. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 37,
185–190. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1474667017310212,
doi:10.1016/S1474-6670(17)31021-2.
Fan, S., Li, M.Z., Wang, J., 2017. Independent component analysis with application to
hot galvanizing pickling waste liquor treatment process, in: 2017 36th Chinese Control
Conference (CCC), IEEE, Dalian. pp. 7045–7050. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8028466/, doi:10.23919/ChiCC.2017.8028466.
Fan,S.,Zhang,Y.,2018. Applicationofindependentcomponentanalysiswithsemi-supervised
Laplacian regularization kernel density estimation. The Canadian Journal of Chemical En-
gineering 96, 1327–1336. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cjce.
23067, doi:10.1002/cjce.23067.
Farina,M.,Osto,E.,Perizzato,A.,Piroddi,L.,Scattolini,R.,2015. Faultdetectionandisola-
tionofbearingsinadrivereducerofahotsteelrollingmill. ControlEngineeringPractice39,
35–44. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066115000283,
doi:10.1016/j.conengprac.2015.02.001.
Fleischanderl, S., Javurek, M., Putz, V., Hierzenberger, D., Holzer, H., Angeli, G., 2022.
CNN–based crack detection in oxide layers of hot rolled steel sheet samples for the vali-
dation of a pickling process model, in: 2022 The 3rd European Symposium on Software
Engineering, ACM, Rome Italy. pp. 133–141. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
3571697.3576937, doi:10.1145/3571697.3576937.
Fouka, A., Bousdekis, A., Lepenioti, K., Mentzas, G., 2021. Real-Time Equipment Health
State Prediction with LSTM Networks and Bayesian Inference, in: ADVANCED IN-
FORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS, pp. 155–166. doi:10.1007/
978-3-030-79022-6\_13.
Fu, X., Han, J., Castle, M., Cao, K., 2023. Digitaltwin-drivenvibrationamplitudesimulation
for condition monitoring of axial blowers in blast furnace ironmaking. Systems Science &
Control Engineering 11, 2152400. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
1080/21642583.2022.2152400, doi:10.1080/21642583.2022.2152400.
40
Gajdzik, B., Wolniak, R., 2021. Transitioning of steel producers to the steelworks 4.0 –
literature review with case studies. Energies 14. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/
record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85110495975&doi=10.3390%2fen14144109&partnerID=40&
md5=0b47a58dfd18b70df66759a56b987643, doi:10.3390/en14144109. cited by: 23; All
Open Access, Gold Open Access.
Ganin, Y., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., Germain, P., Larochelle, H., Laviolette, F., Marchand,
M., Lempitsky, V., 2016. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 17, 2096–2030.
Gao, D., Yang, C., Yang, B., Chen, Y., Deng, R., 2023. Minimax entropy-based co-
training for fault diagnosis of blast furnace. Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering 59,
231–239. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1004954122004827,
doi:10.1016/j.cjche.2022.12.007.
Gao, D., Zhu, X.Z., Yang, C., Huang, X., Wang, W., 2022. Deep weighted joint distribution
adaption network for fault diagnosis of blast furnace ironmaking process. Computers &
ChemicalEngineering162,107797. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0098135422001363, doi:10.1016/j.compchemeng.2022.107797.
Gao, L., Wu, L., Wang, Y., Wei, H., Ye, H., 2010. Intelligent fault diagnostic system based
on RBR for the gearbox of rolling mills. Frontiers of Mechanical Engineering in China 5,
483–490. URL:http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11465-010-0118-6, doi:10.1007/
s11465-010-0118-6.
Garcia-Beltran, C., Gentil, S., Stuecher, R., 2004. Causal-Based Diagnosis of a Hydraulic
Looper. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 37, 173–178. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1474667017310194, doi:10.1016/S1474-6670(17)31019-4.
Gerz, F., Basturk, T.R., Kirchhoff, J., Denker, J., Al-Shrouf, L., Jelali, M., 2022. A Com-
parative Study and a New Industrial Platform for Decentralized Anomaly Detection Using
Machine Learning Algorithms, in: 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN), IEEE, Padua, Italy. pp. 1–8. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9892939/, doi:10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892939.
Goode, K.B., Moore, J., Roylance, B.J., 2000. Plant machinery working life predic-
tion method utilizing reliability and condition-monitoring data. Proceedings of the In-
stitution of Mechanical Engineers, Part E: Journal of Process Mechanical Engineering
214, 109–122. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1243/0954408001530146,
doi:10.1243/0954408001530146.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org.
Grant, M.J., Booth, A., 2009. A typology of reviews: an analysis of 14 re-
view types and associated methodologies. Health Information & Libraries Jour-
nal 26, 91–108. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.
1471-1842.2009.00848.x, doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x,
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x.
Guo, H., Sun, J., Yang, J., Peng, Y., 2023. Quality-RelatedProcessMonitoringandDiagnosis
of Hot-Rolled Strip Based on Weighted Statistical Feature KPLS. Sensors 23, 6038. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/13/6038, doi:10.3390/s23136038.
41
Han, H., Wang, J., Wang, X., Chen, S., 2022a. Construction and Evolution of Fault Di-
agnosis Knowledge Graph in Industrial Process. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
and Measurement 71, 1–12. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9863829/,
doi:10.1109/TIM.2022.3200429.
Han, S., Sun, S., Zhao, Z., Luan, Z., Niu, P., 2024. Deep residual multiscale convolutional
neural network with attention mechanism for bearing fault diagnosis under strong noise
environment. IEEE Sensors Journal 24, 9073–9081. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2023.3345400.
Han, Y., Li, Q., Wang, C., Zhao, Q., 2022b. A novel knowledge enhanced graph neural
networks for fault diagnosis with application to blast furnace process safety. Process Safety
and Environmental Protection 166, 143–157. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0957582022006930, doi:10.1016/j.psep.2022.08.014.
Han, Z., Shi, H., Liu, Y., Ba, L., Yuan, Q., Yang, M., Gao, X., 2021. Framework for
remaining useful life prediction of casting roller in continuous casting machine based on
digitaltwin, in: 2021IEEEInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineeringandArtificial
Intelligence (SEAI), IEEE, Xiamen, China. pp. 17–22. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9477527/, doi:10.1109/SEAI52285.2021.9477527.
Hao, Z., Wang, Z., Bai, D., Tao, B., Tong, X., Chen, B., 2022. Intelligent Detection of
Steel Defects Based on Improved Split Attention Networks. Frontiers in Bioengineering
and Biotechnology 9, 810876. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fbioe.2021.810876/full, doi:10.3389/fbioe.2021.810876.
Hasan, M.J., Sohaib, M., Kim, J.M., 2021. An explainable ai-based fault diagnosis model
for bearings. Sensors 21. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/12/4070, doi:10.
3390/s21124070.
Hasselt, H.v., Guez, A., Silver, D., 2016. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning,
in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press.
p. 2094–2100.
Hirata, T., Kawahara, Y., Sugiyama, M., Asano, K., 2015. A fault detection technique for
the steel manufacturing process based on a normal pattern library. IFAC-PapersOnLine 48,
871–876. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405896315017656,
doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.636.
Hojjati, H., Sadeghi, M., Armanfard, N., 2023. Multivariate time-series anomaly detection
with¬†temporal self-supervision and¬†graphs: Application to¬†vehicle failure prediction,
in: DeFrancisciMorales, G., Perlich, C., Ruchansky, N., Kourtellis, N., Baralis, E., Bonchi,
F. (Eds.), Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Applied Data Science
and Demo Track, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham. pp. 242–259.
Holappa, L., 2020. A general vision for reduction of energy consumption and co2 emissions
from the steel industry. Metals 10. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4701/10/9/1117,
doi:10.3390/met10091117.
Holloway, L., Paul, C., Strosnider, J., Krogh, B., 1991. Integration of behavioral fault-
detection models and an intelligent reactive scheduler, in: Proceedings of the 1991 IEEE
International Symposium on Intelligent Control, IEEE, Arlington, VA, USA. pp. 134–
139. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/187346/, doi:10.1109/ISIC.1991.
187346.
42
Ince, T., Kiranyaz, S., Eren, L., Askar, M., Gabbouj, M., 2016. Real-time motor fault
detectionby1-dconvolutionalneuralnetworks.IEEETransactionsonIndustrialElectronics
63, 7067–7075. doi:10.1109/TIE.2016.2582729.
Jakubowski, J., Stanisz, P., Bobek, S., Nalepa, G.J., 2021a. Anomaly Detection in Asset
Degradation Process Using Variational Autoencoder and Explanations. Sensors 22, 291.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/1/291, doi:10.3390/s22010291.
Jakubowski, J., Stanisz, P., Bobek, S., Nalepa, G.J., 2021b. Explainable anomaly detection
for Hot-rolling industrial process, in: 2021 IEEE 8th International Conference on Data
Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), IEEE, Porto, Portugal. pp. 1–10. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9564228/, doi:10.1109/DSAA53316.2021.9564228.
Jakubowski, J., Stanisz, P., Bobek, S., Nalepa, G.J., 2022. Roll Wear Prediction in Strip Cold
Rolling with Physics-Informed Autoencoder and Counterfactual Explanations, in: 2022
IEEE 9th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA),
IEEE, Shenzhen, China. pp. 1–10. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
10032357/, doi:10.1109/DSAA54385.2022.10032357.
Ji, J., Zhao, C., Wang, Y., Zhao, T., Zhang, X., 2021. A Fault Diagnosis Method of Rolling
Mill Bearing at Low Frequency and Overload Condition Based on Integration of EEMD
and GA-DBN. Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2021, 1–13. URL: https://www.
hindawi.com/journals/mpe/2021/2502476/, doi:10.1155/2021/2502476.
Jiang, G., Jiang, L., Shang, C., 2019. Research on blast furnace stability evaluation model
basedonneuralnetworksusingdynamicsamplingapproach. JournalofPhysics: Conference
Series 1325, 012072. URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/
1325/1/012072, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1325/1/012072.
Jiang, Y., Yin, S., 2017. Recent results on key performance indicator oriented fault detection
using the DB-KIT toolbox, in: IECON 2017 - 43rd Annual Conference of the IEEE Indus-
trial Electronics Society, IEEE, Beijing. pp. 7103–7108. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8217242/, doi:10.1109/IECON.2017.8217242.
Jiang, Y., Yin, S., Kaynak, O., 2021. Optimized Design of Parity Relation-Based Residual
Generator for Fault Detection: Data-Driven Approaches. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 17, 1449–1458. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9069263/,
doi:10.1109/TII.2020.2987840.
Jianliang, S., Mengqian, S., Hesong, G., Yan, P., Jiang, J., Lipu, X., 2020.
Research on Edge Surface Warping Defect Diagnosis Based on Fusion Dimen-
sion Reduction Layer DBN and Contribution Plot Method. Journal of Mechan-
ics 36, 889–899. URL: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/
S1727719120000520/type/journal_article, doi:10.1017/jmech.2020.52.
Jiao, R., Peng, K., Dong, J., 2021. Remaining Useful Life Prediction for a Roller in a Hot
Strip Mill Based on Deep Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica
Sinica 8, 1345–1354. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9444540/, doi:10.
1109/JAS.2021.1004051.
Jin, F., Wu, H., Liu, Y., Zhao, J., Wang, W., 2023. Varying-scale HCA-DBSCAN-based
anomaly detection method for multi-dimensional energy data in steel industry. Infor-
mation Sciences 647, 119479. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0020025523010642, doi:10.1016/j.ins.2023.119479.
43
Jing,F.,Feng,Z.,Liu,H.,Li,J.,Song,Y.,2023a. IntelligentProcessAccuracyEvaluationand
Analysis System for Hot Strip Rolling, in: 2023 42nd Chinese Control Conference (CCC),
IEEE, Tianjin, China. pp. 6891–6896. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
10241083/, doi:10.23919/CCC58697.2023.10241083.
Jing, F.w., Chen, Z.y., Li, J., Guo, Q., 2023b. Correlation analysis between looper system
and strip width narrowing in hot strip rolling. International Journal on Interactive Design
and Manufacturing (IJIDeM) 17, 539–551. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s12008-022-00940-y, doi:10.1007/s12008-022-00940-y.
Junichi, T., Yukinori, I., 2020. Condition Monitoring Technology for Steel Making Facilities
Utilizing Data Science. JFE Technical Report , 39–44.
Karagiorgou, S., Rountos, C., Chatzimarkaki, G., Vafeiadis, G., Ntalaperas, D., Vergeti,
D., Alexandrou, D., 2020. On Making Factories Smarter through Actionable Predictions
based on Time-Series Data. Procedia Manufacturing 51, 1207–1214. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2351978920320266, doi:10.1016/j.promfg.
2020.10.169.
Karagiorgou, S., Vafeiadis, G., Ntalaperas, D., Lykousas, N., Vergeti, D., Alexandrou, D.,
2019. Unveiling Trends and Predictions in Digital Factories, in: 2019 15th International
ConferenceonDistributedComputinginSensorSystems(DCOSS),IEEE,SantoriniIsland,
Greece. pp. 326–332. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8804845/, doi:10.
1109/DCOSS.2019.00073.
Kim, J.C., Jung, S.W., Choi, J.B., Chang, Y.S., Kim, Y.J., Hwang, I.J., 2006. Development
of a Neural Network-Based Real-Time Fatigue Monitoring System for the Heavy Load
Carrying Facility. Solid State Phenomena 110, 201–212. URL: https://www.scientific.
net/SSP.110.201, doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/SSP.110.201.
Konishi, M., Nakano, K., 2010. Application of SVM method to operation diagnosis of hot
strip rolling, in: 2010 International Conference on Modelling, Identification and Control,
pp. 522 – 526.
Kovaˇciˇc, M., Mihevc, A., Terˇcelj, M., 2019. Roll wear modeling using genetic programming
– industry case study. materiali in tehnologije 53, 319–325. URL: http://mit.imt.si/
Revija/izvodi/mit193/kovacic.pdf, doi:10.17222/mit.2018.104.
Krejcar, O., 2011. New Possibilities in Using of Neural Networks Library for Material De-
fect Detection Diagnosis, in: Kacprzyk, J., Katarzyniak, R., Chiu, T.F., Hong, C.F.,
Nguyen, N.T. (Eds.), Semantic Methods for Knowledge Management and Communication.
SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,Berlin,Heidelberg.volume381,pp.67–80. URL:http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-23418-7_7, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-23418-7_7.
Krot, P., Prykhodko, I., Raznosilin, V., Zimroz, R., 2020. Model Based Monitoring
of Dynamic Loads and Remaining Useful Life Prediction in Rolling Mills and Heavy
Machinery, in: Ball, A., Gelman, L., Rao, B.K.N. (Eds.), Advances in Asset Man-
agement and Condition Monitoring. Springer International Publishing, Cham. volume
166, pp. 399–416. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-57745-2_34,
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-57745-2_34.
Kulkarni, M., Mahata, D., Arora, R., Bhowmik, R., 2022. Learning rich representation of
keyphrases from text. arXiv:2112.08547.
44
Kumar, A., Das, A., 2022. A nonlinear process monitoring strategy with a 2-phase fault
diagnosis approach. Engineering Research Express 4, 025015. URL: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/2631-8695/ac65de, doi:10.1088/2631-8695/ac65de.
Lakshmanan, K., Borghini, E., Beckmann, A., Pleydell-Pearce, C., Giannetti, C., 2022. Data
modelling and Remaining Useful Life estimation of rolls in a steel making cold rolling pro-
cess. Procedia Computer Science 207, 1057–1066. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1877050922010432, doi:10.1016/j.procs.2022.09.161.
Latham,S.,Giannetti,C.,2023. ATooltoCombineExpertKnowledgeandMachineLearning
for Defect Detection and Root Cause Analysis in a Hot Strip Mill. SN Computer Science 4,
628. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s42979-023-02104-5, doi:10.1007/
s42979-023-02104-5.
Lebru´n, C.A.V., Castan˜eda, R.S., Ortega, G.R., Lopez, J.M., Vald´ez, J.L.C., Medina, H.F.,
2013. Mathematical modelling of roll wear in a tandem mill hot strip rolling process. Inter-
nationalJournalofMathematicalModellingandNumericalOptimisation4,56. URL:http:
//www.inderscience.com/link.php?id=51334, doi:10.1504/IJMMNO.2013.051334.
Lepenioti, K., Pertselakis, M., Bousdekis, A., Louca, A., Lampathaki, F., Apostolou, D.,
Mentzas, G., Anastasiou, S., 2020. Machine Learning for Predictive and Prescriptive An-
alytics of Operational Data in Smart Manufacturing, in: ADVANCED INFORMATION
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS, pp. 5–16. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-49165-9\
_1.
Li, D., Lu, J., Zhang, T., Ding, J., 2023a. Self-Supervised Learning and Multisource
Heterogeneous Information Fusion Based Quality Anomaly Detection for Heavy-Plate
Shape. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , 1–12URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10103164/, doi:10.1109/TASE.2023.3265649.
Li, K., Zhang, T., Dong, W., Ye, H., 2023b. Abnormality Detection of Blast Furnace Iron-
making Process Based on an Improved Diffusion Convolutional Gated Recurrent Unit
Network. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 72, 1–12. URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10268036/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2023.3320734.
Li, L., Ding, S.X., 2020. Performance Supervised Fault Detection Schemes for Industrial
Feedback Control Systems and their Data-Driven Implementation. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 16, 2849–2858. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8827307/, doi:10.1109/TII.2019.2940099.
Li, Q., Lan, J., Li, G., 2020. Research on Health Management Platform Based on Data Anal-
ysis. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1631, 012142. URL: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-6596/1631/1/012142, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1631/
1/012142.
Li, Y., Jiang, Y., Wang, X., Zhou, J., Tang, X.Y., Yang, C., 2023c. Blast furnace state
monitoring method based on reliability analysis of sensing system, in: 2023 2nd Conference
on Fully Actuated System Theory and Applications (CFASTA), IEEE, Qingdao, China.
pp. 931–936. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10243340/, doi:10.1109/
CFASTA57821.2023.10243340.
Lian, P., Ning, N., Aiping, C., Yaobin, T., 2010. Fault Diagnosis of the Blast Furnace
Based on the Bayesian Network Model, in: 2010 International Conference on Electrical and
45
Control Engineering, IEEE, Wuhan. pp. 990–993. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/5630561/, doi:10.1109/iCECE.2010.251.
Lisounkin, A., Schreck, G., Paiuk, J., Muratori, F., Viale, M., Vigliocco, A., Cipriano,
A.Z., Orchard, M.C., Kuchen, B., Lage, A., Rossomando, F., Schmidt, H.W., Gal´an, R.,
Jimenez, A., 2002. ADVANCED MODEL BASED PROCESS SUPERVISION IN HOT
STEEL MILLING. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 35, 425–430. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1474667015384949, doi:10.3182/20020721-6-ES-1901.
00073.
Liu, C., Zhang, K., 2023. An unsupervised anomaly detection approach us-
ing spatiotemporal feature in hot strip rolling, in: Ladaci, S., Kaswan, S.
(Eds.), International Conference on Automation Control, Algorithm, and In-
telligent Bionics (ACAIB 2023), SPIE, Xiamen, China. p. 114. URL: https:
//www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/12759/2686573/
An-unsupervised-anomaly-detection-approach-using-spatiotemporal-feature-in-hot/
10.1117/12.2686573.full, doi:10.1117/12.2686573.
Liu, F.T., Ting, K.M., Zhou, Z., 2008. Isolation forest, in: 2008 Eighth IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining, pp. 413–422. doi:10.1109/ICDM.2008.17.
Liu, J., Xu, L., Xie, Y., Ma, T., Wang, J., Tang, Z., Gui, W., Yin, H., Jahanshahi, H., 2023.
Toward Robust Fault Identification of Complex Industrial Processes Using Stacked Sparse-
Denoising Autoencoder With Softmax Classifier. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 53,
428–442. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9546667/, doi:10.1109/TCYB.
2021.3109618.
Liu, L., Wang, A., Sha, M., Sun, X., Li, Y., 2011a. Optional SVM for Fault
Diagnosis of Blast Furnace with Imbalanced Data. ISIJ International 51, 1474–
1479. URL: http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/51/9/51_9_
1474/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.51.1474.
Liu,L.m.,Wang,A.n.,Sha,M.,Zhao,F.y.,2011b. Multi-ClassClassificationMethodsofCost-
ConsciousLS-SVMforFaultDiagnosisofBlastFurnace. JournalofIronandSteelResearch
International 18, 17–23. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1016/S1006-706X(12)
60016-8, doi:10.1016/S1006-706X(12)60016-8.
Liu, Q., Qin, S.J., Chai, T., 2014a. Multiblock Concurrent PLS for Decentralized Monitoring
of Continuous Annealing Processes. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 61, 6429–
6437. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6729046/, doi:10.1109/TIE.2014.
2303781.
Liu, Q., Qin, S.J., Chai, T., 2014b. Quality-Relevant Monitoring and Diagnosis with Dy-
namic Concurrent Projection to Latent Structures. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 47, 2740–
2745. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1474667016420240,
doi:10.3182/20140824-6-ZA-1003.02329.
Liu, Q., Zhu, Q., Qin, S.J., Chai, T., 2018a. Dynamic concurrent kernel CCA for
strip-thickness relevant fault diagnosis of continuous annealing processes. Journal of
Process Control 67, 12–22. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0959152416301639, doi:10.1016/j.jprocont.2016.11.009.
Liu, S., Hao, P., 2021. Anomaly detection of ladle driving force based on Temporal
Convolutional Network, in: 2021 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
46
and Advanced Manufacture, ACM, Manchester United Kingdom. pp. 2063–2067. URL:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3495018.3501050, doi:10.1145/3495018.3501050.
Liu, S., Zhao, Y., Li, X., Liu, X., Lyu, Q., Hao, L., 2021. An Online Sintering Batch-
ing System Based on Machine Learning and Intelligent Algorithm. ISIJ International 61,
2237–2248. URL: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/61/8/
61_ISIJINT-2020-522/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.ISIJINT-2020-522.
Liu, Y., Gao, Z., 2015. Enhanced just-in-time modelling for online quality pre-
diction in BF ironmaking. Ironmaking & Steelmaking 42, 321–330. URL:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1179/1743281214Y.0000000229,
doi:10.1179/1743281214Y.0000000229.
Liu, Y., Zeng, J., Xie, L., Luo, S., Su, H., 2018b. Structured Joint Sparse Principal Compo-
nent Analysis for Fault Detection and Isolation, in: 2018 IEEE 7th Data Driven Control
and Learning Systems Conference (DDCLS), IEEE, Enshi. pp. 777–782. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8516087/, doi:10.1109/DDCLS.2018.8516087.
Lou, S., Wu, P., Yang, C., Xu, Y., 2023a. Structured fault information-aided canonical
variate analysis model for dynamic process monitoring. Journal of Process Control 124,
54–69. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0959152423000112,
doi:10.1016/j.jprocont.2023.01.011.
Lou, S., Yang, C., Wu, P., Kong, L., Xu, Y., 2022. Fault Diagnosis of Blast Furnace Iron-
Making Process With a Novel Deep Stationary Kernel Learning Support Vector Machine
Approach.IEEETransactionsonInstrumentationandMeasurement71,1–13.URL:https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9863658/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2022.3200113.
Lou, S., Yang, C., Wu, P., Yang, Y., Kong, L., Zhang, X., 2023b. Data-Driven Joint
Fault Diagnosis Based on RMK-ASSA and DBSKNet for Blast Furnace Iron-Making Pro-
cess. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , 1–16URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10159592/, doi:10.1109/TASE.2023.3287578.
Lu, X., Sun, J., Song, Z., Li, G., Wang, Z., Hu, Y., Wang, Q., Zhang, D., 2020. Predic-
tion and analysis of cold rolling mill vibration based on a data-driven method. Applied
Soft Computing 96, 106706. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S156849462030644X, doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106706.
Lu, Y., Wang, F., Chang, Y., Jia, M., Zhu, M., 2013. PCA-SDG based Fault Diagnosis on
CAPL Furnace Temperature System, in: 2013 25TH CHINESE CONTROL AND DECI-
SION CONFERENCE (CCDC), pp. 3550–3554.
Luk’yanov, S.I., Suspitsyn, E.S., Krasilnikov, S.S., Shvidchenko, D.V., 2015. Intelligent
system for prediction of liquid metal breakouts under a mold of slab continuous casting
machines. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 79, 1861–
1868. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00170-015-6945-1, doi:10.1007/
s00170-015-6945-1.
Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I., 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, in:
Guyon, I., Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett,
R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
pp. 4765–4774.
47
Ma, L., Dong, J., Hu, C., Peng, K., 2021a. A novel decentralized detection framework
for quality-related faults in manufacturing industrial processes. Neurocomputing 428,
30–41. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0925231220318385,
doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2020.11.045.
Ma, L., Dong, J., Peng, K., 2022a. A Novel Multilabel Classification Framework for Coupling
Faults in Hot Rolling Processes. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 30,
877–884. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9422916/, doi:10.1109/TCST.
2021.3074427.
Ma, L., Dong, J., Peng, K., 2022b. A Practical Root Cause Diagnosis Framework for Quality-
Related Faults in Manufacturing Processes With Irregular Sampling Measurements. IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 71, 1–9. URL: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/9761920/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2022.3169531.
Ma,L.,Peng,K.,Dong,J.,Hu,C.,2021b. Anovelsemisupervisedclassificationframeworkfor
coupling faults in hot rolling mill process. ISA Transactions 111, 376–386. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0019057820304699, doi:10.1016/j.isatra.
2020.10.066.
Ma, T., Liu, S., Liu, J., Zheng, Z., Li, Z., Gui, W., 2023. Fault Diagnosis of Laminar Cooling
Roller Motor Based on Morphological Recognition and Combination Patterns Mining of
Multicurrent Signatures. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 72, 1–
15. URL:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10059133/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2023.
3252623.
Marcu, T., Koppen-Seliger, B., Stiicher, R., 2004. Hydraulic looper fault detection and
isolation using dynamic neural networks, in: IFAC Automation in Mining. Mineral and
Metal Processing, pp. 179–184. doi:10.1016/s1474-6670(17)31020-0.
Marcu, T., K¨oppen-Seliger, B., Stu¨cher, R., 2008. Design of fault detection for a hy-
draulic looper using dynamic neural networks. Control Engineering Practice 16, 192–213.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066106002218, doi:10.
1016/j.conengprac.2006.11.017.
Marsland,S.,2014. MachineLearning: AnAlgorithmicPerspective. ChapmanandHall/CRC.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1201/b17476, doi:10.1201/b17476.
Mashhadi, P.S., Nowaczyk, S., Pashami, S., 2020. Stacked ensemble of recurrent neural
networks for predicting turbocharger remaining useful life. Applied Sciences 10. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/1/69, doi:10.3390/app10010069.
Meneganti, M., Saviello, F., Tagliaferri, R., 1998. Fuzzy neural networks for classification
and detection of anomalies. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 9, 848–861. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/712157/, doi:10.1109/72.712157.
Mentouri, Z., Moussaoui, A., Boudjehem, D., Doghmane, H., 2020. Steel Strip Surface
Defect Identification using Multiresolution Binarized Image Features. Journal of Failure
Analysis and Prevention 20, 1917–1927. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s11668-020-01012-7, doi:10.1007/s11668-020-01012-7.
Meyer, K., Mahalec, V., 2022. Anomaly detection methods for infrequent failures in re-
sistive steel welding. Journal of Manufacturing Processes 75, 497–513. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1526612521008756, doi:10.1016/j.jmapro.
2021.12.003.
48
Miyabe, Y., Biegl, C., Kawamura, K., 1988. Methodologies for a real-time intelligent super-
visory system for a hot strip mill finisher, in: Proceedings of the first international confer-
ence on Industrial and engineering applications of artificial intelligence and expert systems
- IEA/AIE ’88, ACM Press, Tullahoma, Tennessee, United States. pp. 483–491. URL:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=51909.51964, doi:10.1145/51909.51964.
Mobley, R.K., 2002. An introduction to predictive maintenance. Elsevier.
Neto, W.F., Cavalcante, C., Do, P., 2021. Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Maintenance
Decision-Making for a Steel Production Line, in: Proceedings of the 31st European Safety
and Reliability Conference (ESREL 2021), Research Publishing Services. pp. 2611–2618.
URL: https://rpsonline.com.sg/proceedings/9789811820168/html/600.xml, doi:10.
3850/978-981-18-2016-8_600-cd.
NEU, 2013. Neu steel defects database. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
kaustubhdikshit/neu-surface-defect-database. Accessed: January 30, 2024.
Nkonyana, T., Sun, Y., Twala, B., Dogo, E., 2019. Performance Evaluation of Data Min-
ing Techniques in Steel Manufacturing Industry. Procedia Manufacturing 35, 623–628.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2351978919307292, doi:10.
1016/j.promfg.2019.06.004.
Oh,J.S.,Kim,H.E.,2015.ACaseStudyonConditionMonitoringBasedonStatisticalFeature
for Coil Break on Tandem Cold Rolling, in: PROCEEDINGS OF THE 7TH WORLD
CONGRESS ON ENGINEERING ASSET MANAGEMENT (WCEAM 2012), pp. 483–
491. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-06966-1\_43.
Okoh,C.,Roy,R.,Mehnen,J.,Redding,L.,2014. Overviewofremainingusefullifeprediction
techniquesinthrough-lifeengineeringservices. ProcediaCIRP16,158–163. URL:https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827114001140, doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.procir.2014.02.006. product Services Systems and Value Creation. Pro-
ceedings of the 6th CIRP Conference on Industrial Product-Service Systems.
Ouyang, H., Zeng, J., Li, Y., Luo, S., 2020. Fault detection and identification of blast furnace
ironmaking process using the gated recurrent unit network. Processes 8. doi:10.3390/
PR8040391.
Page, M.J., McKenzie, J.E., Bossuyt, P.M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T.C., Mulrow, C.D.,
Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J.M., Akl, E.A., Brennan, S.E., Chou, R., Glanville, J., Grimshaw,
J.M., Hr´objartsson, A., Lalu, M.M., Li, T., Loder, E.W., Mayo-Wilson, E., McDonald, S.,
McGuinness, L.A., Stewart, L.A., Thomas, J., Tricco, A.C., Welch, V.A., Whiting, P., Mo-
her, D., 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic
reviews. Systematic Reviews 10. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-021-01626-4,
doi:10.1186/s13643-021-01626-4.
Pan, J., Chen, J., Zi, Y., Yuan, J., Chen, B., He, Z., 2016a. Data-driven mono-
component feature identification via modified nonlocal means and MEWT for mechan-
ical drivetrain fault diagnosis. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 80, 533–552.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0888327016300905, doi:10.
1016/j.ymssp.2016.05.013.
Pan, Y., Yang, C., An, R., Sun, Y., 2016b. Fault detection with improved princi-
pal component pursuit method. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 157,
49
111–119. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0169743916301654,
doi:10.1016/j.chemolab.2016.07.003.
Pan, Y., Yang, C., An, R., Sun, Y., 2018. Robust Principal Component Pursuit for Fault
Detection in a Blast Furnace Process. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 57,
283–291. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.7b03338, doi:10.1021/
acs.iecr.7b03338.
Panagou, S., Fruggiero, F., Del Vecchio, C., Sarda, K., Menchetti, F., Piedimonte, L., Na-
tale, O.R., Passariello, S., 2022a. Explorative hybrid digital twin framework for predic-
tive maintenance in steel industry. IFAC-PapersOnLine 55, 289–294. URL: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405896323000940, doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.
2023.01.087.
Panagou, S., Fruggiero, F., Lerra, M., Vecchio, C.D., Menchetti, F., Piedimonte, L., Na-
tale, O.R., Passariello, S., 2022b. Feature investigation with Digital Twin for pre-
dictive maintenance following a machine learning approach. IFAC-PapersOnLine 55,
132–137. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405896322001835,
doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.2022.04.182.
Pashami, S., Nowaczyk, S., Fan, Y., Jakubowski, J., Paiva, N., Davari, N., Bobek, S.,
Jamshidi, S., Sarmadi, H., Alabdallah, A., Ribeiro, R.P., Veloso, B., Sayed Mouchaweh,
M., Rajaoarisoa, L.H., Nalepa, G.J., Gama, J., 2023. Explainable predictive mainte-
nance. CoRR abs/2306.05120. URL: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05120,
doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2306.05120, arXiv:2306.05120.
Peng, G., Huang, K.,Wang, H., 2021. Dynamicmultimodeprocessmonitoringusingrecursive
GMM and KPCA in a hot rolling mill process. Systems Science & Control Engineering
9, 592–601. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/21642583.2021.
1967220, doi:10.1080/21642583.2021.1967220.
Peng,K.,Zhang,K.,Dong,J.,Yang,X.,2014a. Anewdata-drivenprocessmonitoringscheme
for key performance indictors with application to hot strip mill process. Journal of the
Franklin Institute 351, 4555–4569. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S001600321400177X, doi:10.1016/j.jfranklin.2014.06.006.
Peng, K., Zhang, K., He, X., Li, G., Yang, X., 2014b. New kernel independent and principal
components analysis-based process monitoring approach with application to hot strip mill
process.IETControlTheory&Applications8,1723–1731.URL:https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-cta.2013.0691, doi:10.1049/iet-cta.2013.0691.
Peng, K., Zhang, K., You, B., Dong, J., 2015. Quality-related prediction and monitoring of
multi-mode processes using multiple PLS with application to an industrial hot strip mill.
Neurocomputing 168, 1094–1103. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0925231215006323, doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2015.05.014.
Peng, K., Zhang, K., You, B., Dong, J., Wang, Z., 2016. A Quality-Based Nonlinear Fault Di-
agnosis Framework Focusing on Industrial Multimode Batch Processes. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics , 1–1URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7390061/,
doi:10.1109/TIE.2016.2520906.
Peng, R., Zhang, X., Shi, P., 2022. Multi-Representation Domain Adaptation Network with
Duplex Adversarial Learning for Hot-Rolling Mill Fault Diagnosis. Entropy 25, 83. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/25/1/83, doi:10.3390/e25010083.
50
Peng, Y., Wang, C., Hao, Y., Zhen, L., Chen, G., Kumar, N., Yu, K., 2023. High-Precision
SurfaceCrackDetectionforRollingSteelProductionEquipmentinICPS. IEEEInternetof
Things Journal , 1–1URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10210205/, doi:10.
1109/JIOT.2023.3302317.
Prytz, R., Nowaczyk, S., R¨ognvaldsson, T., Byttner, S., 2015. Predicting the need for
vehicle compressor repairs using maintenance records and logged vehicle data. En-
gineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 41, 139–150. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197615000391, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.engappai.2015.02.009.
Puttinger, S., Stocker, H., 2019. Improving Blast Furnace Raceway Blockage Detection. Part
1: Classification of Blockage Events and Processing Framework. ISIJ International 59,
466–473. URL: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/59/3/
59_ISIJINT-2018-530/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.ISIJINT-2018-530.
P´erez, D., Garc´ıa-Fern´andez, F.J., D´ıaz, I., Cuadrado, A.A., Ordonez, D.G., D´ıez, A.B.,
Dom´ınguez, M., 2013. Visual analysis of a cold rolling process using a dimensionality
reduction approach. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 26, 1865–1871.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0952197613000961, doi:10.
1016/j.engappai.2013.05.009.
Qian, G., Liu, J., 2022. Development of deep reinforcement learning-based fault di-
agnosis method for rotating machinery in nuclear power plants. Progress in Nuclear
Energy 152, 104401. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S014919702200275X, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2022.104401.
Qiang Liu, Tianyou Chai, Hong Wang, Si-Zhao Joe Qin, 2011. Data-Based Hybrid Tension
Estimation and Fault Diagnosis of Cold Rolling Continuous Annealing Processes. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 22, 2284–2295. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/6026953/, doi:10.1109/TNN.2011.2167686.
Qing Liu, Feng Zhang, Liu, M., Shen, W., 2016. A fault prediction method based on
modified Genetic Algorithm using BP neural network algorithm, in: 2016 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), IEEE, Budapest,
Hungary. pp. 004614–004619. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7844959/,
doi:10.1109/SMC.2016.7844959.
Raducan, E., Nicolau, V., Andrei, M., Petrea, G., Vlej, G., 2020. Prediction algorithms
using specialized software tools for steel industry equipment, in: 2020 IEEE 26th In-
ternational Symposium for Design and Technology in Electronic Packaging (SIITME),
IEEE, Pitesti, Romania. pp. 174–177. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9292146/, doi:10.1109/SIITME50350.2020.9292146.
Ray, A.K., 1991. Equipment fault diagnosis—A neural network approach. Comput-
ers in Industry 16, 169–177. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
016636159190088Q, doi:10.1016/0166-3615(91)90088-Q.
Ray, A.K., Murty, M.S.S.N., 1989. Artificial intelligence techniques applied to maintenance
management, in: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Industrial and engi-
neering applications of artificial intelligence and expert systems - Volume 1, ACM, Tul-
lahoma Tennessee USA. pp. 112–118. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/66617.
66632, doi:10.1145/66617.66632.
51
Ruiz-Sarmiento, J.R., Monroy, J., Moreno, F.A., Galindo, C., Bonelo, J.M., Gonzalez-
Jimenez, J., 2020. A predictive model for the maintenance of industrial machinery
in the context of industry 4.0. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 87,
103289. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0952197619302489,
doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2019.103289.
Russo, L., Sarda, K., Glielmo, L., Acernese, A., 2021. Fault Detection and Diagnosis
in Steel Industry: a One Class-Support Vector Machine Approach, in: 2021 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), IEEE, Melbourne,
Australia. pp. 2304–2309. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9659069/,
doi:10.1109/SMC52423.2021.9659069.
Saci, A., Al-Dweik, A., Shami, A., 2021. Autocorrelation Integrated Gaussian Based
Anomaly Detection using Sensory Data in Industrial Manufacturing. IEEE Sensors Journal
21, 9231–9241. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9328839/, doi:10.1109/
JSEN.2021.3053039.
Sarda, K., Acernese, A., Nole, V.,Manfredi, L., Greco, L., Glielmo, L., Vecchio, C.D.,2021. A
Multi-Step Anomaly Detection Strategy Based on Robust Distances for the Steel Industry.
IEEEAccess9, 53827–53837. URL:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9393875/,
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3070659.
Schoen,J.,2007. Integratedsteelmillinthenetherlands. URL:https://upload.wikimedia.
org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Hoogovens.JPG. licensed under CC BY 2.5.
Sch¨olkopf, B., Williamson, R., Smola, A., Shawe-Taylor, J., Platt, J., 1999. Support vector
method for novelty detection, in: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. p. 582–588.
Selcuk, S., 2017. Predictive maintenance, its implementation and latest trends. Proceedings
of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture
231, 1670–1679.
Serradilla, O., Zugasti, E., Ramirez de Okariz, J., Rodriguez, J., Zurutuza, U., 2021. Adapt-
able and explainable predictive maintenance: Semi-supervised deep learning for anomaly
detection and diagnosis in press machine data. Applied Sciences 11, 7376.
Severson, K., Chaiwatanodom, P., Braatz, R.D., 2015. Perspectives on process moni-
toring of industrial systems. IFAC-PapersOnLine 48, 931–939. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405896315017759, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.646. 9th IFAC Symposium on Fault Detection, Supervision
andSafety for Technical Processes SAFEPROCESS 2015.
Severstal, 2019. Severstal steel defect detection. https://www.kaggle.com/c/
severstal-steel-defect-detection. Accessed: January 30, 2024.
Sha, X., Luo, C., Diao, N., 2022. A Robust Fault Detection Method Based on Neighborhood
Preserving Embedding. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 71, 1–
12. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9933879/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2022.
3218557.
Shang, J., Chen, M., Ji, H., Zhou, D., Zhang, H., Li, M., 2017. Dominant trend based logistic
regression for fault diagnosis in nonstationary processes. Control Engineering Practice 66,
156–168. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066117301375,
doi:10.1016/j.conengprac.2017.06.011.
52
Shi, P., Gao, H., Yu, Y., Xu, X., Han, D., 2022a. Intelligent fault diagnosis of rolling
mills based on dual attention- guided deep learning method under imbalanced data condi-
tions. Measurement 204, 111993. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0263224122011897, doi:10.1016/j.measurement.2022.111993.
Shi, P., Yu, Y., Gao, H., Hua, C., 2022b. A novel multi-source sensing data fusion driven
method for detecting rolling mill health states under imbalanced and limited datasets.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 171, 108903. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0888327022000905, doi:10.1016/j.ymssp.2022.108903.
Shigemori, H., 2013. Quality and Operation Management System for Steel Products through
Multivariate Statistical Process Control, in: WORLD CONGRESS ON ENGINEERING -
WCE 2013, VOL I, pp. 305–310.
Shin, K.Y., Kwon, W.K., 2018. Development of smart condition monitoring and diagnosis
systemfortandemcoldrollingmillsinironandsteelmanufacturingprocesses,in: 201818th
International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS), pp. 1568–1572.
Shiyan, A., Druzhinin, N., Karandaeva, O., Sarlybaev, A., Antropova, L., 2019. Vibration-
Based Monitoring of Electrotechnical Systems of an Iron-and-Steel Enterprise, in:
2019 International Ural Conference on Electrical Power Engineering (UralCon), IEEE,
Chelyabinsk, Russia. pp. 443–447. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8877675/, doi:10.1109/URALCON.2019.8877675.
Simi´c, D., Svirˇcevi´c, V., Simi´c, S., 2014. An Approach of Steel Plates Fault Diagnosis
in Multiple Classes Decision Making, in: Hutchison, D., Kanade, T., Kittler, J., Klein-
berg, J.M., Kobsa, A., Mattern, F., Mitchell, J.C., Naor, M., Nierstrasz, O., Pandu Ran-
gan, C., Steffen, B., Terzopoulos, D., Tygar, D., Weikum, G., Polycarpou, M., De Car-
valho, A.C.P.L.F., Pan, J.S., Wo´zniak, M., Quintian, H., Corchado, E. (Eds.), Hy-
brid Artificial Intelligence Systems. Springer International Publishing, Cham. volume
8480, pp. 86–97. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-07617-1_8,
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07617-1_8.
Simon,C.,Theilliol,D.,Khelassi,A.,Weber,P.,2021. HealthStateDiagnosisandPrognostics
basedonHiddenMarkovModelonArcelorMittal’sgalvanizingline.IFAC-PapersOnLine54,
61–66. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405896321014531,
doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.2021.10.051.
Slany, W., Vascak, J., 1996. A consistency checker for a fuzzy diagnosis system applied to
warm rolling-mills in steelmaking plants, in: Proceedings of IEEE 5th International Fuzzy
Systems, IEEE, New Orleans, LA, USA. pp. 206–212. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/551743/, doi:10.1109/FUZZY.1996.551743.
Song, K., Yan, Y., 2013. A noise robust method based on completed local binary patterns for
hot-rolledsteelstripsurfacedefects. AppliedSurfaceScience285, 858–864. URL:https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169433213016437, doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.09.002.
Song, L., Xu, D., Wang, X., Yang, Q., Ji, Y., 2022. Application of machine learning to
predict and diagnose for hot-rolled strip crown. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology 120, 881–890. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s00170-022-08825-w, doi:10.1007/s00170-022-08825-w.
53
Spirin, N.A., Gurin, I.A., Istomin, A.S., 2020. Expert system of diagnostics blast
furnace process. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 866,
012043. URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1757-899X/866/1/
012043, doi:10.1088/1757-899X/866/1/012043.
Straat, M., Koster, K., Goet, N., Bunte, K., 2022. An Industry 4.0 example: real-time
quality control for steel-based mass production using Machine Learning on non-invasive
sensor data, in: 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE,
Padua, Italy. pp. 01–08. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9892432/,
doi:10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892432.
Sun, T.Q., Liu, R., Xie, C.X., 2012. The Research of Blast Furnace Blower Shaft Fault Diag-
nosis Beased on Wavelet Analysis. Applied Mechanics and Materials 263-266, 255–260.
URL: https://www.scientific.net/AMM.263-266.255, doi:10.4028/www.scientific.
net/AMM.263-266.255.
Sun, Y., An, Y., 2009a. Research of fault diagnosis system for pickling and cold-rolling
electric drives based on BP neural network, in: 2009 International Conference on Test and
Measurement, pp. 161–164. doi:10.1109/ICTM.2009.5412971.
Sun, Y., An, Y., 2009b. Research of on-line monitoring and fault diagnosis system for cold-
rolling based on RBF neural network, in: 2009 International Conference on Test and Mea-
surement, pp. 165–168. doi:10.1109/ICTM.2009.5412972.
Surucu, O., Gadsden, S.A., Yawney, J., 2023. Condition monitoring using machine learn-
ing: A review of theory, applications, and recent advances. Expert Systems with Ap-
plications 221, 119738. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417423002397, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119738.
Taghiyarrenani, Z., Nowaczyk, S., Pashami, S., Bouguelia, M.R., 2023. Multi-domain adap-
tation for regression under conditional distribution shift. Expert Systems with Appli-
cations 224, 119907. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417423004086, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119907.
Tan, S., Wang, F., Chang, Y., Chen, W., Xu, J., 2010. Fault Detection and Diagnosis of
Nonlinear Processes Based on Kernel ICA-KCCA, in: 2010 CHINESE CONTROL AND
DECISION CONFERENCE, VOLS 1-5, pp. 3869+. doi:10.1109/CCDC.2010.5498466.
Thomas, D., 2018. The costs and benefits of advanced maintenance in manufacturing.
doi:https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AMS.100-18.
Tian, H., Wang, A., 2010. A Novel Fault Diagnosis System for Blast Fur-
nace Based on Support Vector Machine Ensemble. ISIJ International 50, 738–
742. URL: http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/50/5/50_5_
738/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.50.738.
Tiensuu, H., Tamminen, S., Haapala, O., R¨oning, J., 2020. Intelligent methods for root cause
analysis behind the center line deviation of the steel strip. Open Engineering 10, 386–
393. URL: https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/eng-2020-0041/html,
doi:10.1515/eng-2020-0041.
for Internal Policies of the Union., E.P.D.G., Trinomics., 2021. Moving towards zero-emission
steel: technologies available, prospects, timeline and costs. Publications Office. URL:
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/60524, doi:10.2861/60524.
54
Wakiru, J.M., Pintelon, L., Muchiri, P.N., Chemweno, P.K., 2019. A review on
lubricant condition monitoring information analysis for maintenance decision sup-
port. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 118, 108–132. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0888327018305788, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.08.039.
Wang, A., Liu, Z., Tao, R., 2010. Fault diagnosis of blast furnace based on improved binary-
tree SVMs, in: 2010 World Automation Congress, pp. 1–7.
Wang, A., Sha, M., Liu, L., Chu, M., 2015a. A New Process Industry Fault Diagnosis
Algorithm Based on Ensemble Improved Binary-Tree SVM. Chinese Journal of Electronics
24,258–262. URL:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/cje.2015.04.006,
doi:10.1049/cje.2015.04.006.
Wang, B., Mao, Z., 2018. Detecting Outliers in Electric Arc Furnace under the Condition
of Unlabeled, Imbalanced, Non-stationary and Noisy Data. Measurement and Control 51,
83–93. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0020294018771097, doi:10.
1177/0020294018771097.
Wang, B., Mao, Z., Huang, K., 2018. A prediction and outlier detection scheme of molten
steel temperature in ladle furnace. Chemical Engineering Research and Design 138,
229–247. URL:https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0263876218304301,
doi:10.1016/j.cherd.2018.08.030.
Wang, F., Tan, S., Peng, J., Chang, Y., 2012. Process monitoring based on mode identi-
fication for multi-mode process with transitions. Chemometrics and Intelligent Labora-
tory Systems 110, 144–155. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0169743911002279, doi:10.1016/j.chemolab.2011.10.013.
Wang, H., Lan, J., Han, S., Tao, H., 2021a. Research on TPC system fault diag-
nosis method based on the multi-layer ATT-GRU network model, in: Mou, J.,
Chen, S. (Eds.), International Conference on Green Communication, Network,
and Internet of Things (GCNIoT 2021), SPIE, Kunming, China. p. 31. URL:
https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/12085/
2625048/Research-on-TPC-system-fault-diagnosis-method-based-on-the/10.
1117/12.2625048.full, doi:10.1117/12.2625048.
Wang, Q., Peng, K., 2023. Integratedspatio-temporalprocessmonitoringandfaultspatiallo-
cationforthelaminarcoolingofhot-rolledstripsteel. IETControlTheory&Applications,
cth2.12512URL: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/cth2.
12512, doi:10.1049/cth2.12512.
Wang, S., Yuan, Y., Liang, J., Zhang, Z., 2022a. Design of Intelligent Monitoring System
for Blast Furnace Hearth Erosion, in: 2022 41ST CHINESE CONTROL CONFERENCE
(CCC), pp. 5817–5822.
Wang, W., Wang, B., Mao, Z., Song, Y., 2015b. Approach of outlier detection in process
control system, in: The 27th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (2015 CCDC),
IEEE, Qingdao, China. pp. 4350–4354. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
7162650/, doi:10.1109/CCDC.2015.7162650.
Wang, X., Wu, P., Pan, H., 2022b. Blast Furnace Ironmaking Process Fault De-
tection Using Canonical Variate Analysis and Support Vector Data Description, in:
2022 34th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), IEEE, Hefei, China.
55
pp. 224–229. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10033570/, doi:10.1109/
CCDC55256.2022.10033570.
Wang, X.Y., Gao, Z.Y., Xin, Y.L., 2023. Multi-step-ahead prediction of cold rolling chat-
ter state based on the combination of Functional Data Analysis and General Autoregres-
sion Model. SN Applied Sciences 5, 137. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s42452-023-05353-4, doi:10.1007/s42452-023-05353-4.
Wang, Z., Sun, J., Lu, X., Hu, Y., Zhang, D., 2021b. SAE-CCA-based Fault Detection of
Tandem Cold Rolling, in: 2021 33rd Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC),
IEEE,Kunming,China.pp.6773–6778. URL:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9601870/, doi:10.1109/CCDC52312.2021.9601870.
Wang, Z., Wang, J., Chen, S., 2020. Fault Location of Strip Steel Surface Quality Defects on
Hot-Rolling Production Line Based on Information Fusion of Historical Cases and Process
Data. IEEE Access 8, 171240–171251. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9200352/, doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3024582.
Weber, A., Denker, J., Jelali, M., 2022. A learning procedure for detection of process anoma-
lies in the production of metal long products and a new industrial case study. IFAC-
PapersOnLine 55, 325–330. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2405896323001003, doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.2023.01.093.
Weng, X., Xu, X., Wang, L., Zhang, Z., Zeng, J., Shen, X., 2023. Online detection method
for abnormal states of blast furnace system based on memory and forgetting strategies,
in: 2023 2nd Conference on Fully Actuated System Theory and Applications (CFASTA),
IEEE, Qingdao, China. pp. 455–460. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
10243275/, doi:10.1109/CFASTA57821.2023.10243275.
Wu, H., Jin, F., Zhao, J., Wang, W., 2021. Anomalydetectionmethodbasedonmulti-criteria
evaluation for energy data of steel industry, in: 2021 IEEE 10th Data Driven Control and
Learning Systems Conference (DDCLS), IEEE, Suzhou, China. pp. 741–747. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9455470/, doi:10.1109/DDCLS52934.2021.9455470.
Wu, W., Zhang, F., Liu, M., Shen, W., 2014. A multi-agent based failure prediction method
using neural network algorithm, in: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (SMC), IEEE, San Diego, CA, USA. pp. 2268–2272. URL: https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6974263, doi:10.1109/SMC.2014.6974263.
Wu, X., Kang, H., Yuan, S., Jiang, W., Gao, Q., Mi, J., 2023. Anomaly Detection of Liquid
Level in Mold during Continuous Casting by Using Forecasting and Error Generation.
AppliedSciences13,7457. URL:https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/13/7457,doi:10.
3390/app13137457.
Xi, X., Zhou, D., Chen, M., Balakrishnan, N., 2020. Remaining useful life prediction for
fractional degradation processes under varying modes. The Canadian Journal of Chemi-
cal Engineering 98, 1351–1364. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/
cjce.23666, doi:10.1002/cjce.23666.
Xiao,X.,Zhou,J.,Xia,Y.,Gao,X.,Peng,Q.,2023. ANovelMulti-DomainAdaptation-Based
Method for Blast Furnace Anomaly Detection:. International Journal of Web Services Re-
search 20, 1–14. URL: https://services.igi-global.com/resolvedoi/resolve.aspx?
doi=10.4018/IJWSR.326753, doi:10.4018/IJWSR.326753.
56
Xie, S., Yang, C., Gao, D., 2021. Fault Detection Method for Blast Furnace Based on Small-
sample Fault Data Generation, in: 2021 China Automation Congress (CAC), IEEE, Bei-
jing, China. pp. 4595–4600. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9728326/,
doi:10.1109/CAC53003.2021.9728326.
Xing, H.J., Li, L.F., 2020. Robust least squares one-class support vector machine. Pat-
ternRecognitionLetters138,571–578. URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167865520303378, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2020.09.
005.
Xu, E., Zou, F., Shan, P., 2023. A multi-stage fault prediction method of continuous
casting machine based on Weibull distribution and deep learning. Alexandria Engi-
neering Journal 77, 165–175. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S1110016823005537, doi:10.1016/j.aej.2023.06.079.
Xu, Q., Dong, J., Peng, K., Yang, X., 2024. A novel method of neural network model
predictive control integrated process monitoring and applications to hot rolling process.
Expert Systems with Applications 237, 121682. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S095741742302184X, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121682.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., Wang, L., 2021. Industry 4.0 and industry 5.0—inception,
conceptionandperception. JournalofManufacturingSystems61,530–535. URL:https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278612521002119, doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.10.006.
Yan, Z., Xu, F., Tan, J., Liu, H., Liang, B., 2023. Reinforcement learning-based integrated
activefaultdiagnosisandtrackingcontrol. ISATransactions132, 364–376. URL:https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0019057822003299, doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isatra.2022.06.020.
Yang, J., Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Ryan, M., 2021a. Sliding Window Filter Based Strip Breakage
Modelling for Failure Prediction, in: 2021 IEEE 17th International Conference on Automa-
tion Science and Engineering (CASE), IEEE, Lyon, France. pp. 1461–1466. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9551660/, doi:10.1109/CASE49439.2021.9551660.
Yang, L., Hu, H., Yang, S., Wang, S., Chen, F., Guo, Y., 2023a. Life cycle carbon
footprint of electric arc furnace steelmaking processes under different smelting modes
in china. Sustainable Materials and Technologies 35, e00564. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214993722001786, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.susmat.2022.e00564.
Yang, L., Li, X., Liu, Y., 2023b. A novel vision-based defect detection method for hot-rolled
steel strips via multi-branch network. Multimedia Tools and Applications URL: https://
link.springer.com/10.1007/s11042-023-15753-8, doi:10.1007/s11042-023-15753-8.
Yang, R.A.C., Zhou, Z., Wang, L., Pan, Y., 2015. Comparison of Different Optimization
Methods with Support Vecto Machine for Blast Furnace Multi-Fault Classification. IFAC-
PapersOnLine 48, 1204–1209. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2405896315018194, doi:10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.09.690.
Yang, S., Rebmann, A., Tang, M., Moravec, R., Behrmann, D., Baird, M., Bequette,
B.W., 2021b. Process monitoring using causal graphical models, with application to
clogging detection in steel continuous casting. Journal of Process Control 105, 259–266.
57
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0959152421001311, doi:10.
1016/j.jprocont.2021.08.006.
Yang, S., Widodo, A., Caesarendra, W., Oh, J., Shim, M., Kim, S., Yang, B., Lee, W., 2009.
Support vector machine and discrete wavelet transform method for strip rupture detection
based on transient current signal, in: Engineering Asset Lifecycle Management, pp. 671 –
678.
Yemelyanov, V., Chernyi, S., Yemelyanova, N., Varadarajan, V., 2021. Application of neural
networks to forecast changes in the technical condition of critical production facilities.
Computers & Electrical Engineering 93, 107225. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0045790621002159, doi:10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107225.
Yi, J., Zeng, P., 2009. Analysis of two neural networks in the intelligent faults diagnosis of
metallurgic fan machinery. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 5553 LNCS, 755 – 761.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-01513-7_82.
YingweiZhang,JiayuAn,ChiMa,2013. FaultDetectionofNon-GaussianProcessesBasedon
Model Migration. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 21, 1517–1526. URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6320620/, doi:10.1109/TCST.2012.2217966.
Yu, X., Tan, C., 2022. China’s pathway to carbon neutrality for the iron and
steel industry. Global Environmental Change 76, 102574. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378022001121, doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2022.102574.
Yuan, T., Sun, W., Chen, S., Wu, Z., Chao, L., He, A., 2023. Fatigue-Damage Predic-
tion Model of Backup Roll of Hot Strip Mills and its Applications. Journal of Fail-
ure Analysis and Prevention 23, 880–893. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s11668-023-01630-x, doi:10.1007/s11668-023-01630-x.
Zhai, C., Sheng, X., Xiong, W., 2020. Multi-Block Fault Detection for Plant-Wide Dy-
namic Processes Based on Fault Sensitive Slow Features and Support Vector Data Descrip-
tion. IEEE Access 8, 120737–120745. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9130672/, doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3006282.
Zhai, S., Kandemir, M.G., Reinhart, G., 2021. Predictive maintenance integrated produc-
tion scheduling by applying deep generative prognostics models: approach, formulation
and solution. Production Engineering 16, 65–88. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11740-021-01064-0, doi:10.1007/s11740-021-01064-0.
Zhang, C., Peng, K., Dong, J., 2021a. An extensible quality-related fault isolation framework
based on dual broad partial least squares with application to the hot rolling process. Ex-
pert Systems with Applications 167, 114166. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0957417420309040, doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114166.
Zhang, C., Peng, K., Dong, J., Ma, L., Zhang, X., 2022. A Novel Fault Diag-
nosis Method Based on Multi-class Probabilistic SVDD, in: 2022 IEEE 11th Data
Driven Control and Learning Systems Conference (DDCLS), IEEE, Chengdu, China.
pp. 1062–1067. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9858547/, doi:10.1109/
DDCLS55054.2022.9858547.
58
Zhang, C., Peng, K., Dong, J., Miao, L., 2023a. A comprehensive operating performance
assessment framework based on distributed Siamese gated recurrent unit for hot strip mill
process. Applied Soft Computing 132, 109889. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1568494622009383, doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2022.109889.
Zhang, C., Peng, K., Dong, J., Zhang, X., Yang, K., 2023b. A Robust Fault Classifica-
tion Method for Streaming Industrial Data Based on Wasserstein Generative Adversarial
Network and Semi-Supervised Ladder Network. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
and Measurement 72, 1–9. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10082975/,
doi:10.1109/TIM.2023.3262249.
Zhang, H., Chen, M., Xi, X., Zhou, D., 2017a. Remaining Useful Life Prediction for Degra-
dation Processes With Long-Range Dependence. IEEE Transactions on Reliability 66,
1368–1379. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8019886/, doi:10.1109/TR.
2017.2720752.
Zhang, H., Fan, W., Guo, H., Yang, C., 2023c. Dynamic stationary subspace analysis based
on Gaussian mixture models for ironmaking process monitoring. The Canadian Journal
of Chemical Engineering , cjce.25107URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.
1002/cjce.25107, doi:10.1002/cjce.25107.
Zhang, H., Jia, C., Chen, M., 2021b. Remaining Useful Life Prediction for Degradation
Processes With Dependent and Nonstationary Increments. IEEE Transactions on Instru-
mentation and Measurement 70, 1–12. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9446507/, doi:10.1109/TIM.2021.3085935.
Zhang, H., Xi, X., 2022. An intelligent prognostic approach considering multi-mode degrada-
tion processes, in: 2022 China Automation Congress (CAC), IEEE, Xiamen, China. pp.
5742–5747. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10055400/, doi:10.1109/
CAC57257.2022.10055400.
Zhang, H., Zhou, D., Chen, M., Shang, J., 2019a. FBM-Based Remaining Useful Life Pre-
diction for Degradation Processes With Long-Range Dependence and Multiple Modes.
IEEE Transactions on Reliability 68, 1021–1033. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8543175/, doi:10.1109/TR.2018.2877643.
Zhang, H., Zhou, D., Chen, M., Xi, X., 2019b. Predicting remaining useful life based on a
generalized degradation with fractional Brownian motion. Mechanical Systems and Sig-
nal Processing 115, 736–752. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0888327018303613, doi:10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.06.029.
Zhang, K., Shardt, Y.A., Chen, Z., Yang, X., Ding, S.X., Peng, K., 2017b. A KPI-
based process monitoring and fault detection framework for large-scale processes. ISA
Transactions 68, 276–286. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0019057817301908, doi:10.1016/j.isatra.2017.01.029.
Zhang, M., Liu, Q., Deng, J., Chen, C., 2021c. Fault detection of pressure sensor of blast
furnace fan based on Chaos Sparrow Search Algorithm-Support vector machine regression.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2010, 012029. URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1742-6596/2010/1/012029, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/2010/1/012029.
Zhang, Q., Lu, S., Xie, L., Gu, S., Su, H., 2023d. Variational Bayesian State Space
Model for dynamic process fault detection. Journal of Process Control 124, 129–141.
59
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S095915242300029X, doi:10.
1016/j.jprocont.2023.02.004.
Zhang, Q., Yin, Y., Yang, Y., Zhang, S., Dong, J., Zhao, B., 2018. A Novel Analysis
of Furnace Condition Based on Biclustering, in: 2018 37th Chinese Control Conference
(CCC), IEEE, Wuhan. pp. 8262–8267. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
8482769/, doi:10.23919/ChiCC.2018.8482769.
Zhang, T., Wang, W., Ye, H., Huang, D., Zhang, H., Li, M., 2016a. Fault Detection for Iron-
making Process Based on Stacked Denoising Autoencoders, in: 2016 AMERICAN CON-
TROL CONFERENCE (ACC), pp. 3261–3267.
Zhang, T., Ye, H., Wang, W., Zhang, H., 2014. Fault Diagnosis for Blast Furnace Ironmaking
Process Based on Two-stage Principal Component Analysis. ISIJ International 54, 2334–
2341. URL: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/54/10/54_
2334/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.54.2334.
Zhang, T., Ye, H., Zhang, H., Li, M., 2016b. PCA-LMNN-Based Fault Diagnosis Method
for Ironmaking Processes with Insufficient Faulty Data. ISIJ International 56, 1779–
1788. URL: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/56/10/56_
ISIJINT-2016-101/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.ISIJINT-2016-101.
Zhang, W., Yang, D., Wang, H., 2019c. Data-driven methods for predictive maintenance
of industrial equipment: A survey. IEEE Systems Journal 13, 2213–2227. doi:10.1109/
JSYST.2019.2905565.
Zhang, Y., Ma, C., 2011. Fault diagnosis of nonlinear processes using multiscale KPCA and
multiscale KPLS. Chemical Engineering Science 66, 64–72. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0009250910005944, doi:10.1016/j.ces.2010.10.008.
Zhang, Y., Shi, J., Chen, G., 2012/09. A knowledge modeling method of blast furnace
fault diagnosis based on ontology, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Electronic & Mechanical Engineering and Information Technology (EMEIT 2012), Atlantis
Press. pp. 1316–1323. URL: https://doi.org/10.2991/emeit.2012.292, doi:10.2991/
emeit.2012.292.
Zhao, C., Sun, J., Lin, S., Peng, Y., 2021. Fault Diagnosis Method for Rolling Mill Multi Row
Bearings Based on AMVMD-MC1DCNN under Unbalanced Dataset. Sensors 21, 5494.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/16/5494, doi:10.3390/s21165494.
Zhao, J., Liu, K., Wang, W., Liu, Y., 2014. Adaptive fuzzy clustering based anomaly
data detection in energy system of steel industry. Information Sciences 259, 335–345.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0020025513003939, doi:10.
1016/j.ins.2013.05.018.
Zhao,L.T.,Yang,T.,Yan,R.,Zhao,H.B.,2022. Anomalydetectionoftheblastfurnacesmelt-
ingprocessusinganimprovedmultivariatestatisticalprocesscontrolmodel. ProcessSafety
and Environmental Protection 166, 617–627. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0957582022007224, doi:10.1016/j.psep.2022.08.035.
Zhou, B., Ye, H., Zhang, H., Li, M., 2016. Process monitoring of iron-making process
in a blast furnace with PCA-based methods. Control Engineering Practice 47, 1–14.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066115300472, doi:10.
1016/j.conengprac.2015.11.006.
60
Zhou, P., Zhang, R., Liang, M., Fu, J., Wang, H., Chai, T., 2020. Fault identi-
fication for quality monitoring of molten iron in blast furnace ironmaking based on
KPLS with improved contribution rate. Control Engineering Practice 97, 104354.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0967066120300332, doi:10.
1016/j.conengprac.2020.104354.
Zhou, P., Zhang, R., Xie, J., Liu, J., Wang, H., Chai, T., 2021. Data-Driven Monitoring and
Diagnosing of Abnormal Furnace Conditions in Blast Furnace Ironmaking: An Integrated
PCA-ICAMethod. IEEETransactionsonIndustrialElectronics68, 622–631. URL:https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8967236/, doi:10.1109/TIE.2020.2967708.
Zhou, Y., Xu, K., He, F., Zhang, Z., 2022a. Application of Time Series Data Anomaly De-
tection Based on Deep Learning in Continuous Casting Process. ISIJ International 62,
689–698. URL: https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/isijinternational/62/4/
62_ISIJINT-2021-372/_article, doi:10.2355/isijinternational.ISIJINT-2021-372.
Zhou, Y., Xu, K., He, F., Zhang, Z., 2022b. Online abnormal interval detection and classifica-
tion of industrial time series data based on multi-scale deep learning. Journal of the Taiwan
Institute of Chemical Engineers 138, 104445. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S1876107022002425, doi:10.1016/j.jtice.2022.104445.
Zonta,T.,daCosta,C.A.,daRosaRighi,R.,deLima,M.J.,daTrindade,E.S.,Li,G.P.,2020.
Predictive maintenance in the industry 4.0: A systematic literature review. Computers &
Industrial Engineering 150, 106889. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360835220305787, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106889.
61
Appendix A. Supplemtary results
In this appendix we provided detailed information regarding survey results.
Appendix A.1. Summary of papers with respect to type of installation
Scope Asset Papers
Installation Liu et al. (2021)
Subsystem Sinter Machine Egorova et al. (2018)
Table A.2: Summary of studies related to the Sinter Plant
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant An et al. (2020); Chen and Cai (2023); Gao et al. (2022, 2023);
Han et al. (2022b); Jiang et al. (2019); Krejcar (2011); Li et al.
(2023b,c); Lian et al. (2010); Liu et al. (2011b); Liu and Gao
(2015); Liu et al. (2018b); Lou et al. (2022, 2023a,b); Ouyang
et al. (2020); Pan et al. (2016b, 2018); Saci et al. (2021); Sha
et al. (2022); Shang et al. (2017); Spirin et al. (2020); Tian and
Wang (2010); Wang et al. (2010, 2015a, 2022b); Xiao et al.
(2023); Xie et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2015); Zhai et al. (2020);
Zhang et al. (2012/09, 2014, 2016b,a, 2018, 2023c); Zhao et al.
(2022); Zhou et al. (2016, 2020, 2021)
Product Silicon content Liu et al. (2011a); Weng et al. (2023)
Single Device Axial fan Zhang et al. (2021c)
Blowers Bo and Hao (2015); Fu et al. (2023); Raducan et al. (2020); Sun
et al. (2012)
Raceway Puttinger and Stocker (2019)
Wall Xi et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2017a, 2019a,b, 2021b); Zhang and
Xi (2022)
Subsystem Cooling system Meneganti et al. (1998)
Gas flow Zhao et al. (2014)
Hearth Wang et al. (2022a)
Torpedo car Chernyi et al. (2022); Li et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2021a);
Yemelyanov et al. (2021)
Table A.3: Summary of studies related to the Blast Furnace
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Choi et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2015b); Wang and Mao (2018)
Subsystem Transformer Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014); Shiyan et al. (2019)
Table A.4: Summary of studies related to the Electric Arc Furnace
Scope Asset Papers
Single Device Ladle Emelianov et al. (2022); Liu and Hao (2021); Wang et al. (2018)
Subsystem Converter Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019); Dong et al. (2023)
Refractory lining Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019)
Crane Kim et al. (2006)
Shredder Neto et al. (2021)
Table A.5: Summary of studies related to the Steel Plant
62
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Holloway et al. (1991); Xu et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2021b);
Zhou et al. (2022a)
Single Device Bearings Qing Liu et al. (2016); Wu et al. (2014)
Casting roller Han et al. (2021)
Crystallizer David et al. (2012)
Exhaust fan Liu et al. (2023)
Mold Bhattacharya et al. (2005); Luk’yanov et al. (2015); Wu et al.
(2023)
Subsystem Casting speed Zhou et al. (2022b)
Table A.6: Summary of studies related to the Continuous Casting Machine
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Han et al. (2022a); Latham and Giannetti (2023); Liu and Zhang
(2023); Panagou et al. (2022a); Peng et al. (2014a); Wang et al.
(2020); Weber et al. (2022)
Product Strip Ding et al. (2023); Gerz et al. (2022); Jianliang et al. (2020); Jing
et al. (2023a); Li et al. (2023a); Mentouri et al. (2020); Peng
et al. (2023); Song et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2023b)
Single Device Backup roll Yuan et al. (2023)
Bearings Farina et al. (2015); Pan et al. (2016a); Peng et al. (2022)
Gearbox Acernese et al. (2021); Gao et al. (2010); Pan et al. (2016a); Peng
et al. (2022); Russo et al. (2021); Sarda et al. (2021)
Looper Garcia-Beltran et al. (2004); Jiang et al. (2021); Marcu et al.
(2004, 2008)
Motor Fagarasan et al. (2004); Hirata et al. (2015); Ma et al. (2023)
Pump Goode et al. (2000)
Work rolls Anagiannis et al. (2020); Jakubowski et al. (2021a); Jiao et al.
(2021); Kovaˇciˇc et al. (2019); Lebru´n et al. (2013)
Subsystem Feedback control Li and Ding (2020)
system
Finishing mill Krot et al. (2020); Dong et al. (2022); Guo et al. (2023);
Jakubowski et al. (2021b); Jiang and Yin (2017); Jing et al.
(2023b); Konishi and Nakano (2010); Ma et al. (2021b,a,
2022a,b); Miyabe et al. (1988); Peng et al. (2014a,b, 2015, 2016,
2021); Xu et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2017b, 2021a, 2022,
2023a,b,d)
Laminar cooling Wang and Peng (2023)
Rolling stand Acerneseetal.(2022);Chenetal.(2023);Lisounkinetal.(2002);
Panagou et al. (2022b); Ruiz-Sarmiento et al. (2020)
Roughing mill Ma et al. (2021a)
Table A.7: Summary of studies related to the Hot Rolling Mill
Scope Asset Papers
Product Strip Fleischanderl et al. (2022)
Subsystem Loop control Bouhouche et al. (2005, 2006)
system
Waste liquor Fan et al. (2017)
recovery
Table A.8: Summary of studies related to the Pickling Line
63
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Beden et al. (2021); Beden and Beckmann (2023); Chen et al.
(2020); Lepenioti et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2023)
Product Strip Chen et al. (2021b); Yang et al. (2009, 2021a)
Single Device Bearings Ji et al. (2021); Shi et al. (2022a); Zhao et al. (2021)
Motor Sun and An (2009b)
Work rolls Fouka et al. (2021); Jakubowski et al. (2022); Lakshmanan et al.
(2022); Wang et al. (2021b)
Subsystem Rolling stand Lu et al. (2020); Oh and Kim (2015); Shi et al. (2022b); Shin and
Kwon (2018)
Tension system Arinton et al. (2012)
Table A.9: Summary of studies related to the Cold Rolling Mill
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Liu et al. (2014a,b); Yingwei Zhang et al. (2013)
Product Strip Liu et al. (2018a)
Single Device Looper Zhang and Ma (2011)
Subsystem Furnace Lu et al. (2013); Tan et al. (2010); Wang et al. (2012)
Furnace Lu et al. (2013); Wang et al. (2012)
temperature
system
Tension Qiang Liu et al. (2011)
Table A.10: Summary of studies related to the Continuous Annealing Line
Scope Asset Papers
Entire Plant Fan and Zhang (2018)
Single Device Bearings Chen et al. (2021a)
Welder Bonikila et al. (2022); Choi et al. (2023); Meyer and Mahalec
(2022)
Zinc bath roller Simon et al. (2021)
Subsystem Zinc bath Debo´n and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz (2012)
Table A.11: Summary of studies related to the Hot Dip Galvanizing Line
64
Appendix A.2. Summary of papers with respect to AI method
Method Papers
MLP Arinton et al. (2012); Bouhouche et al. (2005, 2006); Chen et al. (2020, 2021b,a, 2023);
Chernyi et al. (2022); Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019); Choi et al. (2020); David
et al. (2012); Dinghui Zhang et al. (2000); Egorova et al. (2018); Emelianov et al.
(2022); Fleischanderl et al. (2022); Gao et al. (2022, 2023); Gerz et al. (2022); Han
et al. (2021, 2022a); Hao et al. (2022); Jiang et al. (2019); Jing et al. (2023a); Krejcar
(2011); Kim et al. (2006); Kumar and Das (2022); Latham and Giannetti (2023); Li
et al. (2020, 2023c,a); Liu and Hao (2021); Liu et al. (2023); Lou et al. (2022, 2023b);
Lu et al. (2020); Ma et al. (2023); Marcu et al. (2004, 2008); Meneganti et al. (1998);
Mentouri et al. (2020); Nkonyana et al. (2019); Peng et al. (2022, 2023); P´erez et al.
(2013); Qiang Liu et al. (2011); Qing Liu et al. (2016); Ray (1991); Shi et al. (2022a,b);
Song et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2014); Xu et al. (2024); Sun and An (2009a,b); Yang
et al. (2021a, 2023b); Yemelyanov et al. (2021); Yi and Zeng (2009); Zhao et al. (2021);
Zhou et al. (2022a,b)
CNN Chernyi et al. (2022); Fleischanderl et al. (2022); Gao et al. (2022, 2023); Gerz et al.
(2022); Hao et al. (2022); Jing et al. (2023a); Latham and Giannetti (2023); Li et al.
(2020, 2023a); Liu and Hao (2021); Ma et al. (2023); Mentouri et al. (2020); Peng et al.
(2022, 2023); Shi et al. (2022b,a); Xu et al. (2024); Yang et al. (2023b); Zhao et al.
(2021); Zhou et al. (2022a,b)
LSTM Chen et al. (2020, 2021b); Choi et al. (2020, 2023); Fouka et al. (2021); Gerz et al.
(2022); Han et al. (2022a); Jakubowski et al. (2021b); Jiao et al. (2021); Jing et al.
(2023a,b); Karagiorgou et al. (2019, 2020); Lakshmanan et al. (2022); Lepenioti et al.
(2020); Ma et al. (2022b); Wu et al. (2023); Zhang and Xi (2022); Zhou et al. (2022a,b)
AE Chen and Cai (2023); Choi et al. (2023); Jakubowski et al. (2021b,a, 2022); Jing et al.
(2023a); Li et al. (2023a,b); Liu et al. (2023); Meyer and Mahalec (2022); Wang et al.
(2021b); Wu et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2023b); Zhang et al. (2016a, 2023b); Zhou et al.
(2022a)
GRU Chen et al. (2020, 2021b); Li et al. (2023b); Ma et al. (2022b, 2023); Ouyang et al.
(2020); Wang et al. (2021a); Wu et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2023, 2024); Zhang and Xi
(2022); Zhang et al. (2023a)
RNN Chen et al. (2020, 2021b); Choi et al. (2020); Marcu et al. (2008); Yang et al. (2021a)
GAN Peng et al. (2023); Xie et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2023b); Zhao et al. (2021)
Attention Hao et al. (2022); Shi et al. (2022a); Wang et al. (2021a)
DBN Ji et al. (2021); Jianliang et al. (2020)
DDQN Acernese et al. (2022); Neto et al. (2021)
Transformer Han et al. (2022a); Ma et al. (2023)
RBM Dong et al. (2023); Liu and Zhang (2023)
RBF NN P´erez et al. (2013)
BLS Zhang et al. (2021a)
GNN Han et al. (2022a)
Table A.12: Summary of studies utilizing Neural Network methods
Method Papers
Gradient Boosting Ding et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2020); Panagou et al. (2022b);
Tiensuu et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020, 2023); Xie et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2024)
RF Chen et al. (2020, 2021a); Simi´c et al. (2014); Nkonyana et al. (2019); Wang et al.
(2023)
CART Debo´n and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz (2012); Song et al. (2022)
Decision Tree Simi´c et al. (2014)
Isolation Forest Gerz et al. (2022)
Table A.13: Summary of studies utilizing Tree-based methods
65
Method Papers
SVM Chen et al. (2020); Fu et al. (2023); Gerz et al. (2022); Simi´c et al. (2014); Jiang et al.
(2021); Konishi and Nakano (2010); Li et al. (2023c); Liu et al. (2011b,a); Lou et al.
(2022); Mentouri et al. (2020); Nkonyana et al. (2019); Ouyang et al. (2020); Russo
et al. (2021); Tian and Wang (2010); Wang et al. (2010, 2015a); Wang and Mao (2018);
Wang et al. (2018, 2022b); Weber et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2009, 2015); Zhai et al.
(2020); Zhang et al. (2022)
OCSVM Gerz et al. (2022); Jiang et al. (2021); Ouyang et al. (2020); Russo et al. (2021); Wang
and Mao (2018); Wang et al. (2018, 2022b); Weber et al. (2022); Zhai et al. (2020);
Zhang et al. (2022)
SVR Liu and Gao (2015); Lu et al. (2020); Song et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2023); Zhang
et al. (2021c)
Table A.14: Summary of studies utilizing Support Vectors methods
Method Papers
Gaussian Mixture Model Chen and Cai (2023); Han et al. (2022b); Peng et al. (2015, 2021);
Xiao et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023c)
Hidden Markov Model Sarda et al. (2021); Simon et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2015b)
Causal Graph Model Garcia-Beltran et al. (2004); Yang et al. (2021b)
Bayes Fouka et al. (2021); Lian et al. (2010); Ma et al. (2021a); Peng et al.
(2016); Ruiz-Sarmiento et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2023d)
Bayesian Network Lian et al. (2010)
Gaussian Process Wang et al. (2018)
Discrete Bayes Filter Ruiz-Sarmiento et al. (2020)
Bayesian Changepoint Detection Fouka et al. (2021)
Bayesian State Space Model Zhang et al. (2023d)
Table A.15: Summary of studies utilizing Probabilistic methods
Method Papers
k-Means Gerz et al. (2022); Shin and Kwon (2018); Wang and Mao (2018)
DBSCAN Gerz et al. (2022); Jin et al. (2023)
Qualitative Trend Clustering Bo and Hao (2015)
mean-shifted clustering Shin and Kwon (2018)
density-based clustering Shin and Kwon (2018)
Table A.16: Summary of studies utilizing Clustering methods
Method Papers
Nearest Neighbors Liuetal.(2011a),Zhaoetal.(2014),Zhangetal.(2016b),Mentourietal.(2020),
Dong et al. (2022), Fu et al. (2023), Ma et al. (2023), Wang et al. (2023)
Signal Processing Fagarasan et al. (2004), Sun et al. (2012), Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014),
Pan et al. (2016a), Shiyan et al. (2019)
Digital Twin Han et al. (2021), Panagou et al. (2022a), Panagou et al. (2022b), Fu et al. (2023)
Linear Debo´n and Carlos Garcia-D´ıaz (2012), Shang et al. (2017), Fu et al. (2023)
MTL Ma et al. (2021b), Ma et al. (2022a)
Table A.17: Summary of studies utilizing miscellaneous ML methods
66
Method Papers
Fuzzy B and Umesh (2019), Bhattacharya et al. (2005), B and Umesh (2019),
Lisounkin et al. (2002),
Rules Gao et al. (2010), Miyabe et al. (1988), Ray and Murty (1989), Slany and
Vascak (1996)
Expert System Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019), Dinghui Zhang et al. (2000), Ray and
Murty (1989), Ray (1991), Spirin et al. (2020)
Ontology Beden et al. (2021), Beden and Beckmann (2023), Cao et al. (2022), Zhang
et al. (2012/09)
Table A.18: Summary of studies utilizing knowledge-based methods
Method Papers
ICA Fan et al. (2017); Fan and Zhang (2018); Peng et al. (2014a,a); Tan et al.
(2010); Wang et al. (2012); Yingwei Zhang et al. (2013); Zhou et al. (2021)
FBM Xi et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2017a, 2019a,b, 2021b)
CCA Liu et al. (2018a); Peng et al. (2014a); Wang et al. (2021b)
CVA Chen et al. (2023); Lou et al. (2023a); Wang et al. (2022b)
PCP Pan et al. (2016b, 2018)
Mahalanobis Distance An et al. (2020); Shin and Kwon (2018)
Slow Features Dong et al. (2022); Zhai et al. (2020)
Scheffee Test Lisounkin et al. (2002)
Markov Chain Zhang et al. (2019a)
MCD Acernese et al. (2021)
Grey Model Zhao et al. (2022)
Mann-Kendall Weng et al. (2023)
Table A.19: Summary of studies utilizing Statistical methods
Method Papers
PCA and AI Yangetal.(2009),Luetal.(2013),Zhangetal.(2016b),Shangetal.(2017),
Egorovaetal.(2018),Luetal.(2020),Jiangetal.(2021),Maetal.(2021a),
Peng et al. (2021), Han et al. (2022b), Kumar and Das (2022), Meyer and
Mahalec (2022), Weber et al. (2022), Xiao et al. (2023), Xu et al. (2024)
PCA Zhang and Ma (2011), Shigemori (2013), Liu et al. (2014a), Zhang et al.
(2014), Hirata et al. (2015), Zhou et al. (2016), Liu et al. (2018b)
PCA and Statistics Wang et al. (2012), Yingwei Zhang et al. (2013), Peng et al. (2014a), Peng
et al. (2014a), Zhou et al. (2021), Zhao et al. (2022)
PLS Liu et al. (2014b), Jiang and Yin (2017), Das (2020), Zhou et al. (2020),
Straat et al. (2022), Guo et al. (2023)
PLS and AI Peng et al. (2015), Peng et al. (2016), Chen et al. (2021a), Zhang et al.
(2021a)
t-SNE P´erez et al. (2013)
NPE Sha et al. (2022)
Table A.20: Summary of studies utilizing dimensionality reduction methods
67
Category Method Papers
Optimization GA Ji et al. (2021); Jing et al. (2023a); Qing Liu et al. (2016); Yang et al.
(2015)
PSO Wang et al. (2022a); Yang et al. (2015)
Genetic Kovaˇciˇc et al. (2019)
Programming
CSSA Zhang et al. (2021c)
Baysesian Jakubowski et al. (2021a,b)
Optimization
Analytical Lisounkin et al. (2002), Lebru´n et al. (2013), Luk’yanov et al. (2015),
Model Anagiannis et al. (2020), Krot et al. (2020), Emelianov et al. (2022),
Jakubowski et al. (2022), Wang et al. (2022a), Wang and Peng (2023),
Yuan et al. (2023)
Signal Fagarasan et al. (2004), Sun et al. (2012), Dehghan Marvasti and
Processing Samet (2014), Pan et al. (2016a), Shiyan et al. (2019)
Table A.21: Summary of studies utilizing other techniques
Method Papers
Contribution Plot Guo et al. (2023), Han et al. (2022b), Kumar and Das (2022), Liu et al. (2018b),
Zhang and Ma (2011), Zhao et al. (2022)
Counterfactuals Jakubowski et al. (2022)
SHAP Ding et al. (2023), Jakubowski et al. (2021a), Jakubowski et al. (2021b), Tiensuu
et al. (2020)
Table A.22: Summary of studies utilizing XAI methods
68
Appendix A.3. Predictive Maintenance tasks
Task Papers
Anomaly Acernese et al. (2021); Choi et al. (2023); Gerz et al. (2022); Jakubowski et al. (2021b,a);
Detection Jiang et al. (2019); Jin et al. (2023); Junichi and Yukinori (2020); Konishi and Nakano
(2010); Li et al. (2023a,b); Liu and Hao (2021); Liu et al. (2021); Liu and Zhang (2023);
MeyerandMahalec(2022);Panetal.(2016b);Sacietal.(2021);Sardaetal.(2021);Spirin
et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2015b); Wang and Mao (2018); Wang et al. (2018); Wang and
Peng (2023); Weber et al. (2022); Weng et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2021, 2023); Xiao et al.
(2023); Yingwei Zhang et al. (2013); Zhao et al. (2014, 2022); Zhou et al. (2016, 2022a,b)
Condition Oh and Kim (2015); Shiyan et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2022a); Yemelyanov et al. (2021)
Monitoring
Defect Fleischanderl et al. (2022); Hao et al. (2022); Simi´c et al. (2014); Yang et al. (2023b)
Detection
Fault Acernese et al. (2022); An et al. (2020); Arinton et al. (2012); Bonikila et al. (2022);
Detection Bouhouche et al. (2005, 2006); Chen et al. (2020, 2021b, 2023); Debo´n and Carlos
Garcia-D´ıaz (2012); Das (2020); Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014); Ding et al. (2023);
Dong et al. (2022); Fagarasan et al. (2004); Fan et al. (2017); Fan and Zhang (2018);
Farina et al. (2015); Fu et al. (2023); B and Umesh (2019); Guo et al. (2023); Hirata et al.
(2015); Holloway et al. (1991); Bhattacharya et al. (2005); Jakubowski et al. (2022); Ji
etal.(2021);JiangandYin(2017);Jiangetal.(2021);LiandDing(2020);Lietal.(2020,
2023c); Lisounkin et al. (2002); Liu et al. (2014b, 2018b); Lou et al. (2023a); Lu et al.
(2020); Luk’yanov et al. (2015); Ma et al. (2021b,a, 2022a); Marcu et al. (2004, 2008);
Meneganti et al. (1998); Ouyang et al. (2020); Pan et al. (2018); Panagou et al. (2022b);
Peng et al. (2014a, 2015, 2016, 2021, 2023); P´erez et al. (2013); Puttinger and Stocker
(2019); Qiang Liu et al. (2011); Ray (1991); Russo et al. (2021); Sha et al. (2022);
Shigemori (2013); Straat et al. (2022); Tan et al. (2010); Wang et al. (2012, 2020, 2021b,
2022b, 2023); Xie et al. (2021); Xu et al. (2023); Yang et al. (2009, 2021a,b); Zhai et al.
(2020); Zhang et al. (2014, 2016a, 2017b, 2021c, 2022, 2023d,c,b)
Fault Bo and Hao (2015); Chernyi et al. (2022); Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019); Das
Diagnosis (2020); Dinghui Zhang et al. (2000); Dong et al. (2023); Egorova et al. (2018); Gao et al.
(2010, 2022); Emelianov et al. (2022); Gao et al. (2023); Garcia-Beltran et al. (2004); Han
et al. (2022a,b); Jianliang et al. (2020); Jing et al. (2023a,b); Kumar and Das (2022); Lian
et al. (2010); Lisounkin et al. (2002); Liu et al. (2011a,b, 2014a, 2018a); Lou et al. (2022,
2023b); Lu et al. (2013); Ma et al. (2023); Mentouri et al. (2020); Miyabe et al. (1988);
Nkonyana et al. (2019); Pan et al. (2016a); Peng et al. (2022); Ray and Murty (1989);
Shang et al. (2017); Shi et al. (2022b,a); Sun et al. (2012); Tian and Wang (2010); Wang
et al. (2010, 2015a, 2021a); Xu et al. (2024); Sun and An (2009b,a); Yang et al. (2015); Yi
and Zeng (2009); Zhang and Ma (2011); Zhang et al. (2016b); Zhao et al. (2021)
Fault Isolation Fagarasan et al. (2004); Zhang et al. (2021a)
Process Chen and Cai (2023); Liu et al. (2018b); Peng et al. (2014a,a); Zhang et al. (2018, 2023a)
Monitoring
Root Cause Han et al. (2022b); Kumar and Das (2022); Latham and Giannetti (2023); Ma et al.
Analysis (2022b); Tiensuu et al. (2020)
Fault Liu et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023a); Zhou et al. (2020, 2021)
Identification
Health Chenetal.(2021a);Davidetal.(2012);Foukaetal.(2021);Lebru´netal.(2013);QingLiu
Estimation et al. (2016); Ruiz-Sarmiento et al. (2020); Wu et al. (2014); Yuan et al. (2023)
Quality Liu and Gao (2015); Song et al. (2022); Straat et al. (2022)
Prediction
Remaining Anagiannis et al. (2020); Krot et al. (2020); Choi et al. (2020); Goode et al. (2000); Han
Useful Life et al. (2021); Jiao et al. (2021); Karagiorgou et al. (2020); Kim et al. (2006); Kovaˇciˇc et al.
(2019); Lakshmanan et al. (2022); Lepenioti et al. (2020); Qing Liu et al. (2016); Raducan
et al. (2020); Simon et al. (2021); Wu et al. (2014); Xi et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2017a,
2019a,b, 2021b); Zhang and Xi (2022)
Scheduling Holloway et al. (1991); Neto et al. (2021); Slany and Vascak (1996)
Table A.23: Summary of studies with respect to PdM task considered
69
Appendix A.4. Summary of papers concerning the bussiness impact of research
Criterion Papers
Collaboration Acernese et al. (2021); Beden et al. (2021); Beden and Beckmann (2023); Bonikila
et al. (2022); Bouhouche et al. (2005); Chen et al. (2021a); Chernyi et al. (2022);
Chistyakova and Novozhilova (2019); Choi et al. (2023); David et al. (2012);
Dehghan Marvasti and Samet (2014); Emelianov et al. (2022); Fagarasan et al.
(2004); Fan et al. (2017); Fu et al. (2023); Gao et al. (2010); Garcia-Beltran et al.
(2004); Goode et al. (2000); Holloway et al. (1991); Bhattacharya et al. (2005);
Jakubowski et al. (2021b,a, 2022); Jin et al. (2023); Krejcar (2011); Kovaˇciˇc et al.
(2019); Latham and Giannetti (2023); Lepenioti et al. (2020); Li and Ding (2020);
Lisounkin et al. (2002); Lou et al. (2022); Luk’yanov et al. (2015); Marcu et al.
(2004); Miyabe et al. (1988); Oh and Kim (2015); Ouyang et al. (2020); Panagou
et al. (2022b); Puttinger and Stocker (2019); Raducan et al. (2020); Ray and
Murty (1989); Russo et al. (2021); Sarda et al. (2021); Shigemori (2013); Shiyan
et al. (2019); Simon et al. (2021); Tiensuu et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020,
2022a); Weber et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2021b); Yemelyanov et al. (2021); Yuan
et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2014, 2016a, 2023a); Zhou et al. (2020)
Implemented Bouhouche et al. (2005); Chen et al. (2021a); Fagarasan et al. (2004);
Garcia-Beltran et al. (2004); Holloway et al. (1991); Bhattacharya et al. (2005);
Jin et al. (2023); Kim et al. (2006); Lisounkin et al. (2002); Luk’yanov et al.
(2015); Panagou et al. (2022a); Peng et al. (2021); Raducan et al. (2020);
Shigemori (2013); Shin and Kwon (2018); Tiensuu et al. (2020); Wang et al.
(2022a); Yemelyanov et al. (2021)
Benefits presented Choi et al. (2023); Han et al. (2021); Luk’yanov et al. (2015)
Table A.24: Summary of papers concerning the business impact of research
70
