2202
peS
5
]IS.sc[
1v50020.9022:viXra
Classical and Quantum Random Walks to
Identify Leaders in Criminal Networks
Annamaria Ficara1(
(cid:0)
) , Giacomo Fiumara1 , Pasquale De Meo2 , and
Salvatore Catanese1
1 University of Messina, MIFT Department,98166 Messina, Italy,
{aficara,gfiumara,scatanese}@unime.it
2 University of Messina, DICAMDepartment,98168 Messina, Italy,
pdemeo@unime.it
Abstract. Random walks simulate the randomness of objects, and are
key instruments in various fields such as computer science, biology and
physics.Thecounterpartofclassicalrandomwalksinquantummechan-
ics are the quantum walks. Quantum walk algorithms provide an expo-
nentialspeedupoverclassicalalgorithms.Classicalandquantumrandom
walks can be applied in social network analysis, and can be used to de-
finespecificcentralitymetricsintermsofnodeoccupationonsingle-layer
and multilayer networks. In this paper, we applied these new centrality
measures tothreereal criminalnetworksderivedfrom ananti-mafiaop-
eration named Montagna and a multilayer network derived from them.
Ouraimisto(i)identifyleadersinourcriminalnetworks,(ii)studythe
dependence between these centralities and the degree, (iii) compare the
results obtained for thereal multilayercriminal network with thoseof a
syntheticmultilayer network which replicates its structure.
Keywords: Classicalrandomwalks,quantumrandomwalks,centrality,
criminal networks
1 Introduction
The term “random walk” was firstly introduced in 1905 by Pearson [20]. Ran-
dom walks can be useful to solve practical problems. In fact, the randomness
of objects can be analyzed and simulated through them. Also the correlation
among objects can be computed using random walks. They are fast becoming
key instruments in various fields such as physics, economics, computer science,
biology, or chemistry [25].
Asimple randomwalkmodelinthe mathematicalspaceis arandomprocess
on a regular lattice where at each step one point jumps to another position ac-
cording to a certain probability distribution [25]. Random walks can be applied
to a network (or graph) defined as a set of nodes with edges between them.
Graphs can be organizedinto multiple layers,which representdifferent types of
nodes or edges. In this kind of application, the transition probability between
nodes is greaterwhen the strength ofthe associationbetween nodes is stronger.
2 Annamaria Ficara et al.
After anappropriatenumberofsteps,arandompathabletodescribethe struc-
ture of a network can be obtained. In computer science, the PageRank is the
most known algorithm based on random walks [19]. This algorithm randomly
walks among web pages to compute their importance.
Aharonov, Davidovich and Zagury were the first to propose quantum walks
in 1993 [1]. These walks can be considered as the counter part of classical ran-
dom walks in quantum mechanics.The main difference between quantum walks
and classical random walks is that the former do not converge to some limiting
distributions [25]. Quantum interference can cause significantly faster or slower
spreading of quantum walks compared to classical random walks. Algorithms
based on quantum walks have lower time complexity with respect to the ones
based on classicalrandom walks,and they provide an exponential speedup over
any classical algorithm [11].
Random walks can find an application in computer vision, semi-supervised
learning,networkembedding,andcomplexsocialnetworkanalysis[17,22].Some
researchersalsostudiedtheapplicationofrandomwalksonknowledgediscovery,
graphs, science of science, and text analysis [22,2,12]. Quantum walks can be
used instead to element distinctness, search problems, and decision trees [23,3].
Moreover,classical algorithms are often accelerated by using quantum walks.
Wald and B¨ottcher [24] at first introduced a framework for classical, quan-
tum, and hybrid random walks with stochastic resetting on networks. Then,
B¨ottcher and Porter [6] used continuous-time classical and quantum random
walks to formulate occupation, PageRank, betweenness, and closeness centrali-
ties for multilayer networks.
Inthispaper,wedecidedtoapplyclassicalandquantumoccupationcentral-
ities onveryspecific kindsofrealnetworks,i.e. Mafianetworks.These networks
are different from traditional social networks because first of all they consist
entirely of suspected criminals, and then they are considered as organizations
of criminal groups and activities. For this reason,researchon criminal networks
is focused on their structure, efficiency, resilience and capacity to achieve crimi-
nal objectives. To the best of our knowledge, classical and quantum walks have
never used to identify leaders in criminal networks. Criminal leaders are strate-
gic brokers within criminal networks [8]. Moreover, to reinforce our finding, we
want to compare the results of classical and quantum walks on Mafia networks
totheoneobtainedonBaraba´si-Albert(BA)[5]models,whichaccordingtoour
previous work [9], are the one to better replicate criminal networks.
Mafianetworksareinfactagoodexampleofreal-worldnetworkswithrespect
to the geometry of connections [16]. Indeed, these connections are the building
blocks of the entire Mafia, and more generally of organized crime. The Sicilian
Mafia is one of the major native mafia-like organizations. It is composed by
loose confederations of about one hundred families (or cosche). Since at least
the 19th century, the social and economic life especially in Southern Italy is
affected by these families [18]. Social network analysis and graph theory can be
appliedtoMafianetworkstodescribetheirstructureandfunctioning,toidentify
Classical and quantum random walks to identify leaders in criminal networks 3
leaders [15], to evaluate police interventions aimed at disrupting them [10], or
to construct crime prevention systems [7].
2 Classical and Quantum Random Walk Centrality
Measures
2.1 Classical Random Walks
Randomwalksongraphsaresequencesofnodes whichstartfromasourcenode
by selecting an edge, crossing the edge to reach a new node, and repeating the
process. An equivalent concept can be found in the Markov chain which is a
stochastic process that assumes values in a discrete set, where the next state
of the chain only depends on the current state and not on the past states [21].
The Markovchaincanbe viewedasa graphwhere nodesarerepresentedby the
states and edges by the possible next states, which are randomly determined.
The set of states is discrete,but their evolutionin terms of time canbe discrete
or continuous.
In a discrete-time Markov chain, each step is associated with a probability
distribution,i.e.asetofprobabilitiesthatawalkerisonanodeorinastate.This
probability distribution can be described with a vector, after choosing an order
for the states. Given a graphG(V,E) with set of nodes V ={v ,...,v }(|V|=
1 n
n) and set of edges E, the probability distribution is described by the vector
[p (t)···p (t)],wherep (t)istheprobabilitythatawalkerisonnodev attime
1 n 1 1
t and so on. If the process begins with the walker on the first node, p (0) = 1
1
and p (0)=0 for i=2,...,n.
i
The future position of the walker cannot be precisely identified, but it is
possible to determine a probability distribution knowing the transition matrix
M. By knowing the probability distribution at the time t, the distribution at
time t+1 can be obtained by the following formula:
n
p (t+1)= M p (t). (1)
i ij j
j=1
X
In vector form, we have ~p(t+1)=Mp(t).
The entry M of the transition matrix is the probability of the walker,who
ij
isonnodev ,togotonodev .Thetransitionmatrixisrelatedtothe adjacency
j i
matrix A of the graph, and it can be defined as:
A
ij
M = , (2)
ij
k
j
where k is the degree of node v , A = 1 when two nodes v and v are
j j ij i j
connectedorA =0iftheyarenot.Ifthereisnoedgefromv tov ,the walker
ij j i
goes to one of the adjacent nodes and transition probability is the same for all
of them.
4 Annamaria Ficara et al.
Whentimeisacontinuousvariable,theproblemofawalkerwhocangofrom
node v to a neighbour v at any time canbe seenas a liquid seeping fromv to
j i j
v . At the beginning, it is likely that the walker is in the node v . As time goes
i j
by,the probabilitythatthe walkerisinv decreases,buttheprobabilityhe isin
j
one of its neighbors increases. The transition between neighbors occurs with a
probabilityγ perunittime,whichisatransitionratepresumablyconstantforall
times and for all nodes. An infinitesimal time interval ǫ is generally used to set
up and solve the differential equation of the problem with continuous variables.
Then, the probability that a walker goes from node v to v is given by γǫ. If
j i
node v has adegreek ,it meansit hask neighbors.Therefore,the probability
j j j
that the the walker is in one of the neighbors of v after time ǫ is k γǫ, while
j j
the probability of finding him in v is 1−k γǫ. At this point, the entry M (t)
j j ij
of the transition matrix at time t is defined as the probability that the walker
on node v goes to node v in the time interval t:
j i
1−k γǫ+O(ǫ2), if i=j;
j
M (ǫ)= (3)
ij (γǫ+O(ǫ2), if i6=j.
An auxiliary matrix called generating matrix H, is also defined as:
k γ, if i=j;
j
H ij (ǫ)=  −γ, if i6=j and adjacent; (4)
0, if i6=j and non-adjacent.
The next state of a Markovchain only depends on the current configuration
ofthechain.Thetransitionmatrixcanbemultipliedatdifferenttimesasfollows:
M (t+ǫ)= M (t)M (ǫ). (5)
ij ik kj
k
X
The index k runs over all the neighbours of node v . In fact, if the walker
j
is in node v , the probability that he goes to v in the time interval is M (ǫ),
j k kj
independently of the value of k. If there is no edge between v and v for a
j k
specific k, M (ǫ)=0.
kj
By isolatingthe termk =j, using the Eqs.3 and 4, andthen by moving the
first term on the right-hand side to the left-hand side and dividing it by ǫ, the
following differential equation is obtained:
dM (t)
ij
=− H M (t) (6)
kj ik
dt
k
X
The solution of Eq. 6 with initial condition M (0)=δ is:
ij ij
M(t)=e−Ht.
(7)
After the definition of the transition matrix, the probability distribution at
time t can be easily obtained.If the initial distributionis p~(0), p~(t)=M(t)p~(0).
Classical and quantum random walks to identify leaders in criminal networks 5
2.2 Quantum Random Walks
The electron spin is described by quantum mechanics as a unit vector in the
Hilbert space C2 [21].The spin upand the spindownare respectivelydescribed
by the vectors |0i and |1i:
1 0
|0i= , |1i= . (8)
0 1
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
The notions of spin up and spin down refer to R3. Quantum mechanics de-
scribes in fact the behavior of the electron before entering the magnetic field.
In this case and if the electron is somehow isolated from the macroscopic envi-
ronment, its spin state is described by a linear combination of vectors |0i and
|1i. Therefore, |ψi=a |0i+a |1i, where the coefficients a and a are complex
0 1 0 1
numbers which satisfy the constraint |a |2+|a |2 =1.
0 1
The time evolution of an isolated quantum system is described by a unitary
transformation. If the state of the quantum system at time t is described by
1
vector |ψ i, the system state |ψ i at time t is obtained from |ψ i by a unitary
1 2 2 1
transformation U, which depends only on t and t . Therefore, we have |ψ i =
1 2 2
U|ψ i.
1
Theevolutionpostulateistobewrittenintheformofadifferentialequation
which provides a method to obtain operator U once given the physical context.
It is called Schr¨odinger equation and it is as follows:
d|ψi
=−iH|ψi. (9)
dt
Inthepassagefromthecontinuous-timeclassicalwalkmodeltothecontinuous-
timequantumwalkmodel,thetransitionmatrixissimplyconvertedtoanequiv-
alent unitary operator, and the vector which describes the probability distribu-
tion to a state vector. Matrix H, given by Eq. 4 is Hermitian, and therefore
matrix M given by Eq. 7 is not unitary. M can be easily made unitary within
the context of Hilbert spaces by multipling h with the imaginary unit, that is
by replacing H with iH. Then, the evolution operator of the continuous-time
quantum walk can be defined as follows:
U(t)=e−iHt.
(10)
If the initial condition is |ψ(0)i, the quantum state at time t is:
|ψ(t)i=U(t)|ψ(0)i, (11)
and the probability distribution is:
p =|hk|ψ(t)i|2, (12)
k
wherek runs overallnodes of the graph(or states ofthe Markovchain)and
|kiisthestateofthe computationalbasiswhichcorrespondtothenode v .The
k
computational basis of space C2 is the set {|0i,|1i}.
6 Annamaria Ficara et al.
2.3 Random Walk Occupation Centralities
Recently continuous-time classical and quantum random walk centrality mea-
sures was defined for single-layer and multilayer networks [24,6].
Starting from Eq. 7, the explicit Euler integration scheme can be used to
simulate a classical random walker:
p =1−H ∆tp , (13)
t+1 c t
where H is the classicalHamiltonian defined as H =LD−1, where L=D−A
c c
is the Laplacian matrix and D is the degree matrix with D = k if i = j and
ii i
D =0 if i6=j.
ij
The classical random walks approaches for connected networks and suffi-
ciently long times a stationary probability distribution p∗ such that:
n
A k
p∗ = ij p∗ = i . (14)
i k j n
X j=1 j k i
i=1
P
The stochastic vector p∗ indicates the stationary classic random walk occu-
i
pationprobabilityOP foranodev ,anditcanbeusedtodefinearandomwalk
c i
centrality measure for graphs.
TheSchr¨odingerequation(seeEq.9)canbe insteadsolvedusingtheCrank-
Nicholsonintegrationscheme[4,24].ExpandingtheevolutionoperatorinEq.10
into a Taylor series, we have:
|ψ t+1 i=−2i∆tH q |ψ t i+|ψ t−1 i, (15)
where H is the Hermitian quantum Hamiltonian defined as H = L, where
q q
L=D−1 2LD−1
2 is the normalized version of the Laplacian matrix L.
For continuous-time quantum walks, unitary time evolution does not lead
to a stationary state. Instead, the long-time behavior of a quantum walk is
characterized by its long-time mean:
1 T
q∗ = lim hi||ψ(t)ihψ(t)||iidt (16)
i T→∞T
Z0
where dt is an infinitesimal time step, |ψ(t)ihψ(t)| is a density operator,and
|ii∈CN is an orthonormal basis vector.
Even in this case, q∗ denotes the continuous-time quantum random walk
i
occupationprobabilityOP ofanodev ,andthereforeitgivesatypeofrandom
q i
walk centrality.
3 Methods and Results
We used the classical and quantum occupation centralities described in Sub-
sect. 2.3 to study the importance of nodes in three real single-layer criminal
Classical and quantum random walks to identify leaders in criminal networks 7
networks (Meetings, Phone Calls and Crimes) related to an anti-mafia opera-
tion called Montagna [7,10,13], from which we derived a fourth network in the
form of a flattened multilayer network.The Montagna operationfocused on the
Mistretta and Batanesiclans who monopolized the sector of public contracts in
the Tyrrhenian strip and in the nebroidal district of the province of Messina,
by working with some entrepreneurs associated to the Sicilian Mafia. Meetings
contains256physicalmeetingsbetween101suspectedcriminalsobservedduring
the police physical surveillance. Phone Calls contains 124 phone calls between
100 suspects wiretapped during the police audio surveillance. Crimes contains
74 connections between 25 suspected criminals who committed crimes together.
Thethreenetworksshare20nodes.We alsocreatedanundirectedandweighted
multilayer network with 226 actors, 454 intralayer edges and 3 layers corre-
sponding to the three single-layer criminal networks Meetings, Phone Calls and
Crimes. In this work, a single-layer network (flattened) is created by merging
the three layersof the multilayernetwork.Inthe flattened network,there is one
node for each actor of the starting multilayer network and an edge between two
nodes if the corresponding actors are linked in one layer. Meeting, wiretap and
co-offending networks provide fundamentally different pictures of the criminal
organization,andthereforeareallparticularlyusefulinfindingleaders.Alsothe
flattenedmultilayernetworkcanbeusefultohaveamorecompletepictureofthe
organization. Figure 1 shows Meetings, Phone Calls, Crimes and the flattened
multilayer network.
Fig.1. Meetings, Phone Calls, Crimes and the flattened multilayer network from the
Montagna anti-mafiaoperation.
8 Annamaria Ficara et al.
Ouranalysiswasconductedusingthemathematicalframework3ofcontinuous-
timeclassicalandquantumcentralitymeasurescreatedbyB¨ottcherandPorter[6].
The top 20 nodes ranked by their classical and quantum occupation proba-
bilities are shown in Fig. 2. In the analysis of central nodes in a Mafia network,
we have to consider the hierarchical structure of a Mafia family in which in-
dividuals can be categorized as boss, underboss, consigliere (i.e., an advisor to
the boss), messaggero (i.e., a messenger among families), caporegime (i.e., who
headsalocalcrewofsoldiers),soldier(i.e., averagetype criminal)andassociate
(e.g., entrepreneurs, pharmacists,police officers, politician etc.). The results for
the Meetings and Phone Calls networks confirm the one obtained through the
application of the degree as we did in [15], revealing that the most important
actors are nodes 18 and 47. These nodes are respectively Caporegime of the
Mistretta family and deputy Caporegime of the Batanesi family. The applica-
tion of OP and OP on the Crimes network reveals instead different central
C q
nodes who are not key members of the Mafia hierarchy but are associates such
as entrepreneurs (i.e., nodes 54 and 64), construction workers (i.e., node 72) or
soldiers(i.e., nodes48and49).Differentlyfromtheapplicationofdegreeonthe
multilayer network, in this case, we obtain different central nodes such as 103,
136 and 111. Nodes 103 and 111 were intercepted because they were in phone
contact respectively with a Caporegime of the Mistretta family (i.e., node 18)
andanon-existententrepreneur,createdforthepurposeoffraud(i.e.,node109).
Node 136 is instead a cohabitant of a Caporegime of the Batanesi family (i.e.,
node 27). The role of these figures in the mafia business in unclear but their
centrality can direct investigations and lead to deeper investigation of them.
Classical and quantum occupation probabilities identify in most cases the same
leaders in criminal networks. Therefore, when a micro approach is adopted in
SNAapplicationtoorganizedcrimefocusing,asinourcase,ononeorganization
ornetworkwitha relativelylownumber ofnodes,there is no clearadvantageto
usingquantumrandomwalksinsteadofclassicalones.However,quantumwalks
can be useful to speed up the investigations, and to find leaders when a macro
approach is adopted to study crime through SNA. In this case, in fact, larger
networks focusing on specific national or regional criminal markets or offender
categories are analyzed.
In Fig. 3, we show the probabilities that a node with a certain degree is
occupied by a classical and quantum random walker. As explained in [6], we
can observe a linear dependence between OP and OP which is due to the fact
c q
that quantum walks satisfy Eq. 14 because they do not approach a stationary
state. Their long-time behavior is instead characterized by the long-time mean
as shown in Eq. 16. Quantum walks are not proportional to the degree which
is not able to capture node occupation properties of this kind of walks. These
properties, in fact, also depend on other structural features of the underlying
networks. The minimum and maximum degrees of the Meetings, Phone Calls,
Crimes networks are respectively 1 and 24, 1 and 25, 1 and 13, as shown in the
3 Available at: https://gitlab.com/ComputationalScience/ctqw centrality
Classical and quantum random walks to identify leaders in criminal networks 9
Fig.2. 20 top ranked nodes computed with classical OP c and quantum OP q random
walk occupation probabilities in the single layer networks Meetings, Phone Calls and
Crimes, and theflattened Montagna multilayernetwork.
plot of the degree distribution in [14]. The differences between these classical
andquantumcentralitiesseemtobe greaterintheflattenedmultilayernetwork.
In [6], the authors asserted that the differences between the classical and
quantum occupation centralities were (i) larger in BA single-layernetworks [24]
orinsyntheticmultilayernetworkswhichincludeBAlayers,and(ii)smallerthan
thoseobservedforsyntheticnetworks.Thesecondresultsisnotvaluableforreal
criminalnetworks,andthiscanbeexplainedjustthroughthefirstfinding.Inour
previous work [9], we used some popular network models such as Erdo¨s-R´enyi,
Watts-Strogatz and different configurations of BA to replicate the topology of
a criminal network. Our experiments identified the BA model as the one which
better represents a criminal network. To prove our thesis, we decided to build
a flattened multilayer network with three BA layers. Each layer is created with
the same number of nodes of the Meetings, Phone Calls, Crimes networks (i.e.,
101, 100, and 25, respectively) and a number of edges as close as possible to
thatofthesenetworks(i.e., 256,124,and74,respectively).BAmodelsarebuilt
based on a specific parameter m, which indicates the number of edges that are
preferentiallyattachedtoexistingnodeswithhighdegree.Forthefirstlayer,we
tried two different configurations of the BA graphs with m = 2 (obtaining 198
10 Annamaria Ficara et al.
Fig.3.Classicalandquantumrandomwalkoccupationprobabilitiesforthesinglelayer
networks Meetings, Phone Calls and Crimes, and the flattened Montagna multilayer
networkthatanodeofdegreekisoccupiedbyaclassicalandquantumrandomwalker,
respectively.
edges) and m = 3 (obtaining 294 edges). For the second layer, we used m = 1
(obtaining 99 edges) and m = 2 (obtaining 196 edges). For the third layer, we
choose m = 3 (obtaining 66 edges) and m = 4 (obtaining 84 edges). Figure 4
shows classical and quantum occupation centralities versus the node degrees on
the described synthetic multilayer network.
4 Conclusions and Discussion
Inthis paper,weusedclassicalandquantumcontinuous-timerandomwalkcen-
trality measures to identify leaders in (i) three single-layer criminal networks
related to an anti-Mafia operation called Montagna, and (ii) a flattened multi-
layer network created from them.
Intheformulationofthesemeasures,differentHamiltoniansdescribetheevo-
lution ofclassicalandquantum walks.Other classicaland quantumcontinuous-
time random walk centralities, such as random walk betweenness or closeness,
can be derived by modifying these Hamiltonians, and tracking different prop-
erties of absorbing random walks. In our future works, we want to apply these
Classical and quantum random walks to identify leaders in criminal networks 11
Fig.4. Classical and quantum random walk occupation probabilities for a flattened
multilayer network composed bythreeBarab´asi-Albert layerswith 101 nodes and 198
edges, 100 nodes and 99 edges, 25 nodes and 66 edges (left column); 101 nodes and
294 edges, 100 nodes and 196 edges, 25 nodes and 84 edges (right column).
othermeasuresonourcriminalnetworkstoidentify leaders,andtodefineanew
disruption framework based on random walks, comparing the targeted attacks
basedontheclassicalcentralitymeasureswiththosebasedontheirrandomwalk
versions.
Moreover,weareplanningtoextendthemathematicalframeworkbyB¨ottcher
and Porter [6] for whole multilayer networks considering the layered structure,
and not just the flattening function. In fact, we can obtain a complete picture
ofthe activities andthe structure ofcriminalorganizationsonly consideringthe
variouslayersnotassingle-layernetworksbutasawholemultilayernetwork[14].
Then, we want to explore the possibility of developing a disruption framework
for multilayer networks.
References
1. Aharonov, Y., Davidovich, L., Zagury, N.: Quantum random walks. Physical Re-
view A 48(2), 1687 (1993)
2. Amancio, D.R.: Comparing the topological properties of real and artificially gen-
erated scientific manuscripts. Scientometrics 105(3), 1763–1779 (2015)
3. Ambainis,A.:Quantumwalkalgorithmforelementdistinctness.SIAMJournalon
Computing 37(1), 210–239 (2007)
4. Askar, A., Cakmak, A.S.: Explicit integration method for the time-dependent
schrodingerequationforcollisionproblems.TheJournalofChemicalPhysics68(6),
2794–2798 (1978)
5. Barab´asi, A.L., Albert, R.: Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science
286(5439), 509–512 (oct 1999)
6. B¨ottcher, L., Porter, M.A.: Classical and quantum random-walk centrality mea-
suresinmultilayernetworks.SIAMJournalonAppliedMathematics 81(6),2704–
2724 (2021)
12 Annamaria Ficara et al.
7. Calderoni, F., Catanese, S., De Meo, P., Ficara, A., Fiumara, G.: Robust link
predictionincriminalnetworks:Acasestudyofthesicilianmafia.ExpertSystems
with Applications 161, 113666 (2020)
8. Calderoni, F., Superchi, E.: The nature of organized crime leadership: criminal
leaders in meeting and wiretap networks. Crime, Law and Social Change 72(4),
419–444 (2019)
9. Cavallaro, L., Ficara, A., Curreri, F., Fiumara, G., De Meo, P., Bagdasar, O.,
Liotta, A.: Graph comparison and artificial models for simulating real criminal
networks. In:Benito, R.M., Cherifi, C., Cherifi, H.,Moro, E., Rocha, L.M., Sales-
Pardo, M. (eds.) Complex Networks and Their Applications IX. pp. 286–297.
Springer, Cham (2021)
10. Cavallaro, L., Ficara, A., De Meo, P., Fiumara, G., Catanese, S., Bagdasar, O.,
Song,W.,Liotta,A.:Disruptingresilientcriminalnetworksthroughdataanalysis:
The case of Sicilian Mafia. PLOS ONE 15(8), 1–22 (2020)
11. Childs,A.M.,Cleve,R.,Deotto,E.,Farhi,E.,Gutmann,S.,Spielman,D.A.:Expo-
nentialalgorithmicspeedupbyaquantumwalk.In:Proceedingsofthethirty-fifth
annualACM symposium on Theory of computing. pp.59–68 (2003)
12. deArruda,H.F., Silva, F.N., daF. Costa, L., Amancio, D.R.:Knowledge acquisi-
tion: A complex networks approach. Information Sciences 421, 154–166 (2017)
13. Ficara,A.,Cavallaro,L.,Curreri,F.,Fiumara,G.,DeMeo,P.,Bagdasar,O.,Song,
W.,Liotta,A.:Criminalnetworksanalysisinmissingdatascenariosthroughgraph
distances. PLOS ONE16(8), 1–18 (2021)
14. Ficara, A., Fiumara, G., Catanese, S., De Meo, P., Liu, X.: The whole is greater
than the sum of the parts: A multilayer approach on criminal networks. Future
Internet14(5), 123 (2022)
15. Ficara, A., Fiumara, G., De Meo, P., Catanese, S.: Multilayer network analysis:
The identification of key actors in a sicilian mafia operation. In: Perakovic, D.,
Knapcikova, L. (eds.) Future Access Enablers for Ubiquitous and Intelligent In-
frastructures. pp.120–134. Springer, Cham (2021)
16. Ficara, A., Saitta, R., Fiumara, G., De Meo, P., Liotta, A.: Game of thieves and
werw-kpath: Two novel measures of node and edge centrality for mafia networks.
In: Teixeira, A., Pacheco, D., Oliveira, M., Barbosa, H., Gonc¸alves, B., Menezes,
R.(eds.) Complex Networks XII.pp.12–23. Springer, Cham (2021)
17. Li, X., Han, Z., Wang, L., Lu, H.: Visual tracking via random walks on graph
model. IEEE transactions on Cybernetics 46(9), 2144–2155 (2015)
18. Paoli, L.: Mafia brotherhoods: Organized crime, Italian style. OUP(2008)
19. Paparo, G.D., Mu¨ller, M., Comellas, F., Martin-Delgado, M.A.: Quantum google
in a complex network. ScientificReports 3(1), 2773 (2013)
20. Pearson, K.: The problem of therandom walk. Nature 72(1867), 342–342 (1905)
21. Portugal,R.:QuantumWalksandSearchAlgorithms.QuantumScienceandTech-
nology, SpringerNew York (2013)
22. Sarkar,P.,Moore, A.W.:Randomwalksinsocialnetworksandtheirapplications:
A survey. In: Aggarwal, C.C. (ed.) Social Network Data Analytics. pp. 43–77.
SpringerUS,Boston, MA (2011)
23. Shenvi, N., Kempe, J., Whaley, K.B.: Quantum random-walk search algorithm.
Physical Review A 67(5), 052307 (2003)
24. Wald, S., B¨ottcher, L.: From classical to quantum walks with stochastic resetting
on networks. Phys. Rev.E 103, 012122 (2021)
25. Xia, F., Liu, J., Nie, H., Fu, Y., Wan, L., Kong, X.: Random walks: A review of
algorithmsandapplications. IEEETransactionsonEmergingTopicsinComputa-
tional Intelligence 4(2), 95–107 (2020)
