Continual Learning for Recurrent Neural Networks: an
Empirical Evaluation
Andrea Cossua,b,1,∗, Antonio Cartaa,1, Vincenzo Lomonacoa, Davide Bacciua
aUniversity of Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3, 56127, Pisa, Italy
bScuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri, 7, 56126, Pisa, Italy
Abstract
Learning continuously during all model lifetime is fundamental to deploy ma-
chine learning solutions robust to drifts in the data distribution. Advances in
Continual Learning (CL) with recurrent neural networks could pave the way to
a large number of applications where incoming data is non stationary, like nat-
ural language processing and robotics. However, the existing body of work on
thetopicisstillfragmented,withapproacheswhichareapplication-specificand
whoseassessmentisbasedonheterogeneouslearningprotocolsanddatasets. In
this paper, we organize the literature on CL for sequential data processing by
providingacategorizationofthecontributionsandareviewofthebenchmarks.
Weproposetwonew benchmarks forCL withsequential databasedon existing
datasets, whose characteristics resemble real-world applications.
We also provide a broad empirical evaluation of CL and Recurrent Neural Net-
worksinclass-incrementalscenario,bytestingtheirabilitytomitigateforgetting
with a number of different strategies which are not specific to sequential data
processing. Ourresultshighlightthekeyroleplayedbythesequencelengthand
the importance of a clear specification of the CL scenario.
Keywords: continual learning, recurrent neural networks, benchmarks,
evaluation
1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) refers to the ability “to learn over time by accom-
modating new knowledge while retaining previously learned experiences” [91].
Traditionally, Machine Learning (ML) models are trained with a large amount
of data to solve a fixed task. The assumption is that, at test time, the model
will encounter similar data. Unfortunately, real world scenarios do not satisfy
this assumption. Non stationary processes produce gradual or abrupt drifts in
the data distribution [31, 45] and the models must be continuously adapted to
∗Correspondingauthor
1Equalcontribution
Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 3, 2021
1202
guA
2
]GL.sc[
4v29470.3012:viXra
the new changes. The objective of incrementally learn new concepts [116] may
result in the Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) of previous knowledge [84, 83, 51].
CF causes a deterioration of the performance on old tasks when acquiring new
knowledge and it is a direct consequence of the stability-plasticity dilemma
[51, 43]: the need to maintain adaptive parameters both stable enough to pre-
serve information and plastic enough to adapt to new tasks. Today, CF is
considered one of the main problems faced by CL algorithms [108, 87, 30].
Machine Learning models endowed with CL capabilities would radically change
the way a model is deployed, removing the need for a separate offline training
phaseandallowingcontinuoustrainingduringtheentiremodellifetimewithout
forgetting previous knowledge.
In this paper we focus on continual learning with Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) [99]. These are adaptive models that can capture the input history
within an internal hidden state which is updated iteratively. These models are
widely used for Sequential Data Processing (SDP) tasks [48], where the input
is a sequence of items.
Recurrentmodelsarenottheonlysolutionforsequentialdataprocessing: time-
delayed neural networks [114] and, more recently, Transformers [112] are feed-
forward neural networks able to handle sequential patterns. Transformers have
not been investigated much in the context of Continual Learning (with one no-
tableexception[105]),whilefeedforwardmodelsuseafixedcontext(e.g. sliding
windows) to emulate temporal coherence. This may be challenging to imple-
ment in Continual Learning, since there may not be the opportunity to collect
enough patterns to build the context before making a prediction.
Ultimately, recurrent models show important differences with respect to both
convolutional and feedforward approaches (including Transformers). Recurrent
models implement a variable number of hidden layers, due to the unrolling
through the entire length of the input sequence. This is not the case for feed-
forward and convolutional models, whose number of layers is usually fixed a
priori. Also, recurrent models leverage weight sharing across time steps. This
influencesthetrajectoryofthelearningpathofrecurrentmodelswhentraining
with backpropagation through time. We hypothesize that these two differences
may impact on the application of CL strategies on recurrent models.
Sequential data is widespread in fundamental machine learning applications
suchasNaturalLanguageProcessing[121],HumanActivityRecognition[7,68],
Speech recognition [48], and Robotics [21]. All these environments are highly
non stationary and represent perfect examples of real world CL applications
where data comes in the form of sequences. For example, a robot that learns
to walk on different terrains or to grasp objects with different shapes will re-
ceive input patterns from its sensors as time series. During its deployment, the
robotwillencounternovelenvironments/objectsandwillneedtoadapttothese
novel settings continuously. It is impossible to pretrain the robot in advance
on all possible environments/objects. What if, once deployed, it is necessary to
adapt to a new terrain or to grasp a new object? Retraining from scratch is an
expensive, unnecessary solution since most of the knowledge needed is already
2
contained in the model. Continual Learning represents a better solution which
canbecombinedwithSDPtechniquestoappropriatelyaddresssequentialdata.
Human activity recognition [55] is another application in which sequential data
processing and continual learning interact. The recognition of new classes of
activities is typically performed from sequential data (e.g. videos, sensors ob-
servations). Therefore, it is fundamental to study how this setting may impact
on existing CL strategies.
As the examples show, sequential data processing may have a strong impact on
Continual Learning, both at the methodological and application level. A true
continual learner should be able to deal with temporally correlated patterns,
since this is the case in many real world scenarios. This advocates for a more
thoroughunderstandingofthebehaviorofrecurrentmodelsinContinualLearn-
ing.
Currently, most of the Continual Learning literature focuses on Computer
Vision and Reinforcement Learning problems [91, 71], while the study of se-
quential data processing remains under-documented. The few existing works
introduce new approaches tailored to specific tasks and use a diverse set of
learning scenarios and experimental protocols. Therefore: i) it remains unclear
whether previously existing CL strategies could still work well in SDP environ-
ments and ii) the heterogeneity of learning scenarios in the literature makes it
difficult to compare experimental results among different papers. In fact, spe-
cific continual settings can have different complexity or require domain-specific
solutions.
Inthispaper, weprovideasystematizationandcategorizationofcurrentlitera-
turetohighlightthedifferentcharacteristicofeachspecificCLstrategyandthe
peculiarities of the data and the continual environment. We adopt the class-
incremental scenario [111] as a common test-bed for CL strategies. This sce-
narioinvolvesastreamofdatawherenewstepsgraduallyintroducenewclasses.
Class-incremental scenarios allow to develop and test generic CL strategies for
recurrent networks. In our experiments, we verify whether or not CL strate-
gies which are not specifically tailored for recurrent models are still sufficient
to endow them with continual learning capabilities. To summarize, our main
contributions of this work are:
a) the first comprehensive review of the literature on continual learning in
RNNs, including a precise categorization of current strategies, datasets and
continual environments adopted by the literature (Section 3);
b) the proposal of two novel benchmarks in the class-incremental setting: Syn-
theticSpeechRecognition,basedonspeechrecognitiondata,andQuickdraw,
based on hand-drawn sketches (Section 4.2);
c) anextensiveexperimentalevaluationof6continuallearningstrategiesonsev-
eral CL environments for sequence classification. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is currently the most extensive evaluation of CL strategies for
recurrent models (Section 5);
d) an experimental comparison that highlights the effect of the recurrence and
3
Task 1 Task 1 Task 1 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3
(a)SingleIncrementalTask (b)MultiTask
Figure1: InSingleIncrementalTask,eachstepbelongstothesametasklabel(whichisthe
sameasnotprovidingatasklabel). InMultiTask,eachstepbelongstoadifferenttasklabel.
Suchinformationcanbeusedtoselectdifferentheadsfordifferenttasksbothattrainingand
testtime. Bestviewedincolor.
sequence length on catastrophic forgetting (Section 6). Also, a comparison
between single-head and multi-head models (Section 6.3) which justifies our
choice of class-incremental scenarios.
2. Continual Learning framework
In the rest of the paper, we will refer to the notation and the Continual
Learning framework defined in this section.
2.1. Notation and fundamental concepts
For a formal definition of continual learning environments we follow the
framework proposed in [71]. For simplicity, here we focus on supervised con-
tinual learning on a sequence of steps S = (S ,S ,...), where each step S
1 2 i
has its own data distribution D and belongs to a specific task with label t .
i i
The patterns drawn from each D are input-target pairs (x ,y ). We study
i j j
sequence classification problems in which y is the target class corresponding
j
to the input sequence x . Each sequence x is composed of T ordered vectors
j j
(x1,...,xT), xi ∈ Rd. In sequence classification, the target is provided only at
j j j
the end of the entire sequence, that is after seeing the last vector xT. Also, the
j
sequence length T may vary from one sequence to another, depending on the
specific application. Figure 2 provides a representation of a sequence classifica-
tion task.
At step i, a new batch of data becomes available. A CL algorithm A executed
at step i leverages the current model h to learn the new training data TR ,
i i
drawnfromD . TheCLalgorithmmayalsouseamemorybufferM andatask
i i
label t associated to the training patterns. The model is then updated using
i
the new data:
A : <h ,TR ,M ,t > → <h ,M >, ∀D ∈(D ,D ,...). (1)
i i−1 i i−1 i i i i 1 2
NoticethatthebufferM andtasklabelt areoptionalandnotalwaysavailable.
i i
For example, it may be impossible to store previous data due to privacy con-
cerns, while the task labels may not be available in many real-world scenarios.
Noticethatthefollowingdefinitiondoesnotposeanycomputationalconstraint
to continual learning algorithms. However, we are often interested in efficient
4
algorithms. As a results, most algorithms assume to have bounded memory
and computational resources. Trivial strategies, such as retraining from scratch
(cid:83)i
using TR as training data, are unfeasible due to their excessive compu-
i=1 i
tational cost and bad scaling properties with respect to the number of steps.
Unfortunately, training sequentially on TR ,...,TR will suffer from catas-
1 n
trophic forgetting.
A Continual Learning scenario de-
fines the properties of the data
stream, such as the distinction be-
tween different tasks and the proper-
tiesofnewdatasamples. Theworkof
[82]and,subsequently,[71]introduces
a classification for continual learn- Figure2: Sequenceclassificationexample. The
input sequence x is composed by T vectors
ing scenarios according to two prop- j
(circles). Thetargetlabel(square)isprovided
erties: the task label sequence and only after the last vector xT. Best viewed in
j
the content of incoming data. The color.
authors distinguished between Multi
Task (MT) scenarios, where each incoming task is different from the previous
ones, Single Incremental Task (SIT) in which the task is always the same, and
Multi Incremental Task (MIT) in which new and old tasks may be interleaved
andpresentedagaintothemodel. Eachtask,identifiedbyitstasklabel,canbe
composedby oneormore steps. Figure1compares SITandMT scenarioswith
respect to the task label information. In addition, data from new steps may
provide New Classes (NC), New Instances (NI) of previously seen classes or a
mixofboth,thatisNewInstancesandClasses (NIC).Apreviouscategorization,
proposed in [111], focused on three main scenarios: Task incremental, Domain
incremental and Class incremental which can find their place in the framework
of [82, 71]. Table 1 summarizes and compare these different classifications.
Task-incremental (MT, MIT) scenarios assume the availability of task labels for
each sample. Unfortunately, in many real-world applications it is difficult to
obtain explicit task labels for each sample. While sometimes it may be possible
to label the data for training, at test time task labels are often not available.
Thisdistinctionisfundamentalsincetheavailabilityoftasklabelssimplifiesthe
learning problem (see Section 6.3). For example, in multi-task scenarios it is
possible to use a multi-head model, in which each task has its own output layer
(head). At test time, the model uses the task label to choose the appropriate
head and to compute the output.
Most CL systems deployed in the real world operate without task labels,
and therefore it is important to develop algorithms that do not require them.
Single incremental task scenarios, where the task label is always the same, re-
quire to use single-head output layers [38]. Single-head models do not partition
the output space, thus they are more susceptible to catastrophic forgetting (see
Section 6.3 for an experimental comparison). Even without the availability of
task label, a model could still leverage a multi-head output layer, but then it
5
Single Multi
Multi Task
Incremental Task Incremental Task
Task Class
New Classes
incremental incremental
Domain
New Instances —
incremental
New Instances
—
and Classes
Table1: ComparisonofdifferentCLscenariosclassification. Thetablehighlightsthefactthat
thethreescenariosforCLintroducedby[111]arenottheonlypossibleonesinCL.Infact,the
scenarioclassificationin[82]provides7scenarios. Dashesindicateunrealisticscenarios: Multi
Task is only compatible with New Classes, since new instances would belong to previously
encounteredtasks. Emptycellsindicatescenarioswhichcouldoccurbutarenotincludedin
theclassificationof[111].
would have to infer at test time which head to use [27]. Figure 3 shows the
difference between multi and single headed models.
The classification proposed above
Head 1 Head 2 Head 3 Single Head
assumes task boundaries are exact
and provided by the environment.
Task-free or online CL [101, 53, 5,
123] removes such assumption by fo- MODEL MODEL
cusing on a stream of data in which
a task label is not provided (SIT)
Figure 3: Multi-head model (left) and single-
and examples are seen one (or a very
head model (right). In the multi-head model,
small number) at a time. Incre- theoutputlayerallocatesadifferentsetofout-
mental or online learning (see [31] putunits(head)foreachtask. Thesingle-head
for a review) shares similarities with modelusethesameoutputlayerforeachtask.
Bestviewedincolor.
continual learning. However, online
learningusuallyfocuseslessoncatas-
trophic forgetting and more on fast learning of new data.
In this scenario, old knowledge must be preserved to help with the new step.
However, the old steps are not necessarily revisited. This settings is common
to many time series applications, such as stock price prediction, or weather and
energy consumption prediction [31].
2.2. Taxonomy of Continual Learning Strategies
Continual learning strategies are traditionally divided into three main fam-
ilies [91]: regularization strategies, architectural strategies and replay (or re-
hearsal) strategies.
6
Regularizationstrategiesbalanceplasticityandstabilitybyaddingareg-
ularizationtermtothelossfunction. Forexample,ElasticWeightConsolidation
(EWC)[64]andSynapticIntelligence[122]estimatetheparametersimportance
andfosterthemodelstabilitybypenalizinglargechangesinimportantparame-
ters. Importancevaluescanbeupdatedaftereachstep,asinEWCanditsmore
efficientversion[102],oronlineaftereachminibatch,asinSynapticIntelligence,
Memory Aware Synapses [3] and EWC++ [19].
Theeffectivenessofimportance-basedregularizationapproacheshasbeenques-
tioned in [72] for class incremental scenarios. The authors showed that this
family of strategies suffers from complete forgetting.
Learning without Forgetting (LwF) [75] is a regularization strategy which is
not based on importance values. LwF retains the knowledge of previous steps
by using knowledge distillation [58] to encourage the current model to behave
similarly to the models trained on the previous steps.
Architectural strategies increment the model plasticity with dynamic mod-
ifications to its architecture, for example by adding new components [98, 120].
Forgetting may be mitigated by freezing previous components [98], by reorga-
nizing the architecture via pruning [61] or by using sparse connections [104].
Due to the very general idea behind this family of strategies, it is quite chal-
lenging to organize the existing body of works. Nonetheless, most members of
thearchitecturalfamilysharesomecommonalities: anincreasingcomputational
cost with the number of steps due to the incremental model expansion and the
need to choose a technique to prevent forgetting on the old model components.
Replay strategiesleverageanexternalmemorytostorepreviousexamplesby
selecting them randomly or with more ad-hoc criteria [97, 109, 4]. Since the
amount of storage required for the memory could grow without bounds, several
approaches use generative replay to avoid the need to explicitly store patterns
[110, 115]. A generative model replaces the memory, thus bounding the mem-
ory cost to the storage of the generative model weights. However, catastrophic
forgetting must be still taken into consideration when training the generative
model.
The three aforementioned families of CL strategies do not capture the en-
tirety of the proposals in CL. Bayesian approaches are increasingly used to
mitigate CF [123, 86, 73, 37] and they have been successfully combined with
regularization [33, 2], architectural approaches [85] and replay [67]. Bayesian
methods in CL consider an initial distribution on the model parameters and
iterativelyapproximateitsposteriorwhennewtasksarrive. Theapproximation
usually includes components able to mitigate forgetting of previous tasks: as
an example, the learning trajectory can be controlled by the uncertainty as-
sociated to each model parameter, computed from its probability distribution.
If a parameter has a large uncertainty value, it is deemed not to be relevant
for the current task. Therefore, to protect important parameters and mitigate
forgetting, theallowedmagnitudeinparameterchangeissettobeproportional
to its uncertainty [2, 33].
Another line of research explores the use of Sparse distributed represen-
7
tations [1]. Machine learning models often produce dense, entangled activa-
tions, where a slight change in one parameter may affect the entire represen-
tation, causing catastrophic forgetting. In contrast, sparse distributed repre-
sentations naturally create independent substructures which do not affect each
other and are less prone to CF [44]. As a result, methods that encourage spar-
sityproducedisentangledrepresentationswhichdonotinterferewitheachother
[47,90,25,6]. Themainproblemisthatsparsitybydesignisnotsufficient: the
model has to learn how to use sparse connections during training.
Since one of the objectives of CL is to quickly learn new information, it seems
natural to combine CL and Meta Learning [60]. There are already efforts
in this direction [12, 62, 16], with a focus on online and task-free scenarios
[39, 57, 54]. Finally, CL has also been studied through the lens of graph-
structured data: expressing similarities in the input patterns through graphs
may help in mitigating forgetting [106]. Also, deep graph networks have been
successfully combined with CL approaches on a number of class-incremental
graph benchmarks [17].
Intheremainderofthissection,wepresentinmoredetailsthemethodsthat
we decided to use in our experiments. We focus on regularization and replay
approaches for recurrent networks. Architectural approaches are a promising
avenue of research but they cannot be easily adapted to different model archi-
tectures. As a result, none of them has emerged as a standard in the literature.
Therefore, we decided to focus on model-agnostic methods that can be easily
adapted to a wide range of models and CL scenarios.
Elastic Weight Consolidation. Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [64] is one
ofthemostpopularCLstrategies. Itbelongstotheregularizationfamilyandit
is based on the estimation of parameters importance. At the end of each step,
EWC computes an importance vector Ω Θ for parameters Θ. The importance
n
vectoriscomputedonthetrainingsetDatstepnbyapproximatingthediagonal
elements of the Fisher Information Matrix:
Ω Θ =E (cid:2) diag((∇ logp (y|x))(∇ logp (y|x))T) (cid:3)
n (x,y)∈D Θ Θ Θ Θ
(2)
=E (cid:2) (∇ logp (y|x))2(cid:3) ,
(x,y)∈D Θ Θ
wherep istheoutputofthemodelparameterizedbyΘand(x,y)istheinput-
θ
target pair.
By strictly following Eq. 2, the expectation operator would require to compute
the squared gradient on each data sample and then average the result. Since
this procedure may be quite slow, a minibatch approach is usually taken. No
major difference is experienced between these two versions.
During training, the loss function is augmented with a regularization term R
which keeps important parameters close to their previous value:
n−1
(cid:88) (cid:88)
R(Θ,Ω)=λ Ω θ(θ −θ )2. (3)
t t n
t=1θ∈Θ
The hyperparameter λ controls the amount of regularization.
8
Memory Aware Synapses. Memory Aware Synapses (MAS) [3] is similar to
EWC since it is an importance-based regularization method. Unlike EWC,
MAScomputesimportancesonlineinanunsupervisedmanner. Therefore,MAS
keepsonlyasingleimportancevectorΩΘ andupdatesitwitharunningaverage
computed after each pattern:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
ΩΘN+1 = NΩΘN +(cid:12)∇ Θ (cid:107)p Θ (x k )(cid:107)2 2 (cid:12) , (4)
N +1
where N indexes the number of patterns seen so far. To make the update
faster, the running average in Eq. 4 can be computed after each minibatch.
The penalization during training is the same of EWC (Eq. 3).
Learning without Forgetting. LearningwithoutForgetting(LwF)[75]isaregu-
larizationapproachbasedonknowledgedistillation[58]. Attheendofeachstep,
a copy of the current model is saved. During training, the previous model pro-
duces its outputs on the current step input. The learning signal for the current
model is regularized by a function measuring the distance between the current
model output and the previous model output. The objective is to keep the two
output distributions close to each other. Formally, when training on step t, the
totallossL isthesumoftheclassificationlossCE(e.g. crossentropy)andthe
t
distillation penalization:
L (x ,y ;Θ ,Θ )= CE (x ,y ) +
t t t t t−1 Θt t t
(5)
+ λ KL[p (x )||p (x )],
Θt t Θt−1 t
where KL[p || q] is the KL-divergence between p and q.
ThesoftmaxtemperatureT usedinthefinallayerofthepreviousmodelcanbe
tuned to control the prediction confidence.
Gradient Episodic Memory. Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM) [79] is a CL
strategy which mitigates forgetting by projecting the gradient update along a
direction which does not interfere with previously acquired knowledge. The av-
eragegradientforeachstepiscomputedusingasmallbufferofsamplescollected
from previous steps. The steps gradients are used to define a set of constraints
whichcannotbeviolatedbytheupdatedirection. Findingtheoptimaldirection
requires solving a quadratic programming problem:
1
min (cid:107)g−z(cid:107)2 (6)
z 2 2
subject to Gz ≥γ, (7)
where G is a matrix in which each column is the gradient computed step-wise
on the memory samples (one column per previous step). The vector g is the
gradient update and γ is the margin within which the constraints must be
respected. GEM can work also in online scenarios [79].
9
Averaged Gradient Episodic Memory. Average-GEM (A-GEM) [20] is a more
efficientversionofGEMwherethequadraticprogramsolutionisapproximated
over a random sample from the memory, thus removing the need to compute a
constraintforeachpreviousstep. Inthiswaytheconstraintsmaybebrokenfor
some step, resulting in worse performance.
The projected gradient gˆ is computed by
gTg
gˆ=g− ref g , (8)
gT g ref
ref ref
where g is the gradient computed on the random memory sample and g is
ref
the proposed gradient update.
A-GEM has also been tested in online scenarios [20].
Replay. Replay strategies store a subset of input patterns from previous steps
in a separate replay memory. To support the generality of our experiments,
in this paper we selected patterns at random from the training set, without
using any specific selection procedure. The memory accepts up to K patterns
per class. During training, each minibatch is augmented with P patterns per
previous class, selected at random from the replay memory. We keep P to very
smallvaluesinordertomaketheapproachreasonableinarealCLenvironment.
The CL strategies presented above belong to different families and have dif-
ferent characteristics. In order to choose which strategy is more suitable to a
specific application, one has to understand their advantages and limitations.
Regularization strategies like EWC, LwF and MAS are very efficient since they
operate without keeping a memory of previous pattern. However, their per-
formance usually deteriorates when observing a large number of steps [72]. In
contrast, Replay remains effective even on long streams of steps [56], even if
the storage of previous patterns may be unfeasible for applications with strict
memory bounds. Finally, GEM and A-GEM share the storage problems of re-
play, since they keep a buffer of previous samples. However, their performance
is usually superior to the regularization strategies in class-incremental settings
[79].
3. Continual Learning with Recurrent Models
Theliteratureoncontinuallearningfocusesonfeedforwardandconvolutional
models,withexperimentsinComputerVisionand,toalesserextent,Reinforce-
mentLearningapplications. Recently,therehasbeenagrowinginteresttowards
continuallearningapplicationswithsequentialdata. Inthissection, weprovide
the first comprehensive review of the literature on recurrent neural networks
in continual learning settings. In addition, we describe the main datasets and
benchmarks for sequential data processing used in Continual Learning.
10
Deep CL Large
Paper RNN Application scenario Comparison
lanimes
[95] × - - ×
[42] × - SIT ×
[9] × - SIT ×
[8] × - SIT ×
[26] × - SIT ×
PLN
[10] (cid:88) domain adaptation SIT ×
[74] (cid:88) instruction learning, NMT SIT ×
[118] (cid:88) language modeling - ×
[66] × language modeling Online ×
[81] (cid:88) sentiment analysis - ×
[107] (cid:88) NMT - ×
deripsni-oib [28] × - Online ×
[88] × - Online, SIT ×
[92] × vision - ×
[65] × motor control MT ×
[89] × - Online ×
gninrael
peed
[119] (cid:88) ASR - ×
[103] (cid:88) - - ×
[100] (cid:88) synthetic - ×
[27] (cid:88) generic SIT ×
[32] (cid:88) neuroscience - ×
[34] (cid:88) - MT (cid:88)
this work (cid:88) - SIT (cid:88)
Table 2: Overview of the literature based on our categorization. Deep RNN refers to the
use of a learning model attributable to the family of deep recurrent networks (e.g. LSTM).
Application-agnosticpapershaveadashintheapplicationcolumn. AdashintheCLscenario
indicates that the paper does not provide its clear indication. Large comparison refers to
experimentswithatleast3CLbaselinesontwodifferentapplicationdomains.
3.1. Survey of Continual Learning in Recurrent Models
We propose a new classification in which each paper is assigned to one of
4 macro-areas: seminal work, natural language processing applications, bio-
inspired and alternative recurrent models, and deep learning models.
Table 2 provides a fine-grained description of our review. For each paper we
highlight 5 different properties: the group to which the paper belongs to, the
use of popular deep learning architectures, the application domain, the type of
CL scenarios and if the paper provides a large experimental comparison. Table
2showsthatwearetheonlyonetoprovidealargescaleevaluationofrecurrent
models in SIT+NC scenario. The details of our categorization are discussed in
the following.
11
Seminal Work. Historically, interest in CL and Sequential Data Processing
traces back to [95] and [42]. The CHILD model [95] represents one of the first
attempts to deal with sequential data in reinforcement learning environments
like mazes. Although CHILD lacks an explicit recurrent structure, the author
discussed about the possibility to include a more powerful memory component
into the model (i.e. a recurrent neural network) to address tasks with longer
temporal dependencies. However, the author also recognizes the difficulties in
this process, due to the challenge of learning very long sequences. Moreover,
thefixedstructureofaRNNcomparedwithagrowingmodellikeCHILDhigh-
lighted the need for approaches based on model expansion.
In the same period, French introduced the pseudo-recurrent connectionist net-
work [42, 41], a model which makes use of pseudo replay [96] (replay based on
random,butfixed,inputpatterns),butdidnotaddresssequentialdataprocess-
ing tasks. Later on, the pseudo recurrent network together with pseudo-replay
inspired the Reverberating Simple Recurrent Network (RSRN) [9, 8]. This is
a dual model composed by two auto-associative recurrent networks which ex-
change information by means of pseudo patterns. In the awake state, the per-
formance network learns a new pattern through backpropagation. The storage
network generates a random pseudo pattern and presents it to the performance
network, interleaved with the real one. Once the loss falls below a certain
threshold, the system enters the sleep state, in which the performance network
generates a pseudo pattern and the storage network learns from it. In this way,
pseudo patterns produced in the awake state carry information about previous
sequences to the performance network, while pseudo patterns produced in the
sleepstatecarryinformationabouttherecentlyacquiredknowledgetothestor-
age network. The authors showed the presence of forgetting on toy sequences
and the beneficial effect of pseudo patterns in mitigating it. However, from
their experiments it is not possible to assess the effectiveness of RSRN on more
realistic benchmarks.
From the very beginning, sparsity has been a recurring theme in Continual
Learning[43,40]. TheFixedExpansionLayer[25]introducedtheuseofalarge,
sparse layer to disentangle the model activations. Subsequently, the Fixed Ex-
pansion Layer has been applied to recurrent models [26]. However, in order to
buildthesparselayerinanoptimalway,themodelrequirestosolveaquadratic
optimization problem (feature-sign search algorithm) which can be problematic
in real world problems (as we discuss in Section 6).
Natural Language Processing. NaturalLanguageProcessingisbecomingoneof
themaintest-bedsforcontinualandonlinesettingsinsequentialdataprocessing
[13]. Most proposals in this area used modern recurrent architectures and fo-
cus on specific problems and strategies. Moreover, they rarely compare against
existing CL techniques. It is therefore challenging to draw general conclusions
on recurrent networks in CL from this kind of experiments. Examples of ap-
plications are online learning of language models where new words are added
incrementally [74, 118, 66], continual learning in neural machine translation on
multiple languages [107] and sentiment analysis on multiple domains [81].
12
Theuseofattentionmechanisms[11],nowwidespreadinNLP,mayprovideap-
proaches which arewidely applicable, since there isno assumptionson thetype
ofinformationtoattendto. Asanexample,theProgressiveMemoryBanks[10]
augments a recurrent neural network with an external memory. The memory
growsintimetoaccommodateforincominginformation,whileatthesametime
freezingpreviousmemorycellssuccessfullypreventsforgetting. Inaddition,the
author showed that finetuning old cells, instead of freezing them, increases for-
ward transfer on future data. Their experiments are executed on incremental
domainadaptationtasks,wherethedistributionofwordsshiftsasnewdomains
are introduced.
Bio-inspired and Alternative Recurrent Models. There are a number of con-
tributions that propose customized architectures to address continual learning
problems and mitigate catastrophic forgetting. Spiking models for CL, such as
the Hierarchical Temporal Memory [28] and the Spiking Neural Coding Net-
work [88], are naturally designed to tackle sequential data processing tasks.
More importantly, they adopt learning algorithms which allow to control more
efficiently the stability-plasticity trade-off. While promising, these approaches
are still missing a thorough empirical validation on real world CL benchmarks.
Echo State Networks [80] are RNNs whose recurrent component, called reser-
voir, is not trained. Therefore, they are appealing for CL since the reservoir
cannot suffer from forgetting. One of the drawbacks may be the fact that the
static connections must be able to learn different tasks without adapting their
values. The work in [65] tries to overcome the problem by employing a frac-
tal reservoir combined with an external task vector (based on the task label)
representing the current task. Different reservoir chunks process different pat-
terns based on their associated task vector. While the final performance on
different motor commands for reinforcement learning environments validated
the approach, the requirement of multi task scenarios limits its applicability.
The Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) is the most used algorithm to
train recurrent networks. The Parallel Temporal Neural Coding Network [89]
introducedanewlearningalgorithmwhichislesssusceptibletoforgettingthan
BPTT and other variants in sequential benchmarks like MNIST and language
modelling.
Temporal information may also arrive from videos. This is particularly impor-
tant since it allows to exploit the vast literature on CL and Computer Vision.
However,itisalsopossibletodevelopspecificsolutions,asithasbeendonewith
recurrent Self Organizing Maps (SOM) [92]. The authors incorporate temporal
information into the recurrent SOM and perform object detection from short
videos with CORe50 dataset [77].
DeepLearningModels. Recently,therehavebeenanumberofpapersthatstud-
ied CL applications in sequential domains using recurrent architectures widely
used in the deep learning literature, such as Elman RNNs [36] and LSTMs [59].
The advantage of this generic approach is that it can be easily adapted to spe-
13
cialized models to solve any sequential problem. As expected, vanilla recurrent
models such as Elman RNNs and LSTMs suffer from catastrophic forgetting in
CL scenarios [103, 100].
The combination of existing CL strategies, like Gradient Episodic Memory [79]
and Net2Net [22], with RNNs has already showed promising results [103]. Con-
trary to vanilla LSTM networks, their model was able to mitigate forgetting in
threesimplebenchmarks. Thisimportantresultsupportstheneedforanexten-
siveevaluationofRNNsandCLstrategiesnotspecificallytailoredtosequential
data processing problems.
Recurrent networks are also inclined to be combined with architectural strate-
gies, since most of them are model agnostic. The idea behind Progressive net-
works [98] has been applied to recurrent models [27] and also improved by
removing the need for task labels at test time with a separate set of LSTM au-
toencoders, able to recognize the distribution from which the pattern is coming
from. The resulting model is multi-headed but it is able to automatically select
theappropriateheadattesttimeinclass-incrementalscenarios. Hypernetworks
(previouslyusedforCLin[113])areabletomitigateforgettingwhencombined
with RNNs [34]: this work was the first to provide an extensive comparison of
traditional CL techniques in several sequential domains. Differently from this
paper, they use multi-task scenarios with a multi-head (see Section 6.3 for a
comparison between single-head and multi-head models). Preserving the space
spannedbytheconnectionsfrombeingcorruptedbytheweightupdateappears
to be beneficial also to CL [32]. Finance [94] and Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion [119] applications have been explored as candidate application domains for
online and continual learning strategies.
3.2. Sequential Data Processing Datasets for Continual Learning
Duetothedifferentapplicationdomainsanddifferentresearchcommunities
interested in continual learning for SDP domains, there are no standard bench-
marks used to evaluate CL strategies. Existing benchmarks vary greatly in
terms of complexity. Furthermore, different application domains use a slightly
different language. In this section, we provide a review of the different datasets
and continual learning scenarios, following the classification described in Table
1. Webelievethatthisreviewcanfavorthecross-pollinationbetweenclassicCL
techniques and sequential domains and between different sequential domains.
Table 3 provides an overview of the different datasets in literature. For
each dataset we highlight previous work that used the datasets, the application
domain of the data, and the CL scenario according to Table 1. Clearly, most
datasets in literature are used by few, or even just one, paper. This is due
to the different research questions each paper tries to answer: since few works
are spread over very different areas, it is natural to find different benchmarks
and evaluation protocols. Unfortunately, these differences in the experimental
setups make it impossible to compare different models in the literature or to
deduce general and task-independent conclusions.
Different synthetic benchmarks have been adapted to continual scenar-
ios. The Copy Task [50], a benchmark used to test the short-term memory of
14
Dataset Application Scenario
Copy Task [103, 34] synthetic MT+NI
Delay/Memory Pro/Anti [32] synthetic, neuroscience MT+NI
Seq. Stroke MNIST [103, 34] stroke classification SIT+(NI/NC)
Quick, Draw! † stroke classification SIT+NC
MNIST-like [27] [26] † object classification SIT+(NI/NC)
CORe50 [92] object recognition SIT+(NI/NC)
MNLI [10] domain adaptation SIT+NI
MDSD [81] sentiment analysis SIT+NI
WMT17 [14] NMT MT+NC
OpenSubtitles18 [76] NMT MT+NC
WIPO COPPA-V2 [63] [107] NMT MT+NC
CALM [66] language modeling Online
WikiText-2 [118] language modeling SIT+NI/NC
Audioset [27, 34] sound classification SIT+NC
LibriSpeech, Switchboard [119] speech recognition (SIT/MT)+NC
Synthetic Speech Commands † sound classification SIT+NC
Acrobot [65] reinforcement learning MT+NI
Table 3: Datasets used in continual learning for sequential data processing. The scenario
column indicates in which scenario the dataset has been used (or could be used when the
related paper does not specify this information). Datasets used on this paper are marked
with†.
recurrent models, incrementally increases the sequence lengths in the continual
setting (SIT+NI). However, the data generating distribution remains constant,
which means that the drift between the different steps is limited. Pixel-MNIST
is another popular benchmark for RNN models [69] where MNIST digits are
presented one pixel at a time, either with the original order or using a fixed
permutation. Continual learning scenarios based on pixel-MNIST include new
classes (SIT+NC in [27] and this paper or MT+NC in [35]) or new permutations
(SIT+NI in this work). Sequential Stroke MNIST [29] represents MNIST digits
[70] as a sequence of pen strokes, with pen displacements as features (plus pen
up/down bit). The dataset is adapted to a continual data stream by increasing
thesequencelength(SIT+NI)orbycreatingnewclasses(SIT+NCin[27]andthis
paper, or MT+NC in [35]). More realistic CL benchmarks for computer vision,
like CORe50 [77], can be used also in sequential contexts to leverage temporal
correlated information from videos.
In the Natural Language Processing domain a common scenario is the
domain-incrementalsetting,wherenewinstancesfromdifferenttopicsaregrad-
ually introduced (SIT+NI). Examples of applications are natural language in-
ference [117, 10], sentiment analysis [81] and machine translation in a MT+NC
scenario[107]. Alternatively,[118]studiestheproblemof onlinelearningalan-
guage model. In this work, EWC is used to keep the previous knowledge when
the recurrent model is trained with a single sequence. CALM is a benchmark
15
specifically designed for online CL in language modeling [66] which provides a
realistic environment in which to test NLP models.
The most common CL scenario in the audio signal processing domain
is the incremental classification (MT/SIT+NC), where new classes are gradually
introduced [27]. For example, AudioSet [46] is a dataset of annotated audio
events. Therawaudiosignalsarealreadypreprocessed,generatingsequencesof
10timestepswith128featureseach. DifferentlyfromSequentialStrokeMNIST
orCopyTask,AudioSetisareal-worldapplication. However,thesmallsequence
lengthmayconcealpossibleproblemswhenworkingwithRNNs. Otherdatasets
in the literature refer to specific applications, like reinforcement learning [65],
or neuroscience problems [32].
4. Evaluating Continual Learning Strategies
In our review, we showed that literature on CL strategies for SDP domains
isstillinitsearlystages. Theuseofheterogeneousbenchmarksandofdifferent
jargon is detrimental to the comparison of the various approaches in litera-
ture. Most of the works focus on customized strategies, often ignoring popular
techniques widely employed in other domains where CL is more mature, e.g.
computer vision. Furthermore, benchmarks have large variations in terms of
complexity. It is for these reasons that we believe of fundamental importance
to put forward a solid and articulated evaluation of existing CL strategies on
RNNarchitectures. Tothisend,wedesignanexperimentalsetupwhichiseasily
reproducible and general enough to be used with all recurrent architectures.
In this section, we focus on two main points related to our evaluation pro-
tocol: the choice of the CL scenarios and the application-agnostic nature of the
benchmarks.
4.1. Defining the Continual Learning Scenario
We rely on class-incremental classification (SIT+NC) of sequences as a stan-
dard and generic scenario to test novel CL techniques for recurrent models.
Incremental classification is a challenging task - at least in the SIT scenario
without explicit task labels - and it is directly applicable to many real-world
problems, such as incremental audio classification.
We deliberately avoid the use of Multitask scenarios (MT, MIT), in which the
tasklabelisexplicitlyprovidedforeachpattern,bothattrainingandtesttime.
Although this assumption may be reasonable in very specific applications (e.g.
machine translation), in the vast majority of the cases such information is not
available. We also experimented with a popular benchmark in the Domain in-
cremental scenario (SIT+NI). This represents a simpler CL problem than class
incremental. Still, it is compatible with our setup since it does not use knowl-
edge about task labels.
16
4.2. Benchmarks
We believe there is a necessity for generic CL benchmarks that measure ba-
sic CL capabilities in sequential domains. This paper contributes to this goal
by adapting the Synthetic Speech Commands dataset [15] and Quick, Draw!
dataset[52]totheincrementalclassificationscenario. Thesearetwotaskswhich
arequiteeasyinanofflinesetting(especiallytheSyntheticSpeechCommands)
but become challenging in a continual setting, making them ideal as a bench-
mark. Moreover, they are suitable to evaluate recurrent models since they have
a sequential nature: feedforward counterparts, although applicable, are more
expensive in terms of adaptive parameters since there is no weight sharing and
they do not incorporate any kind of temporal knowledge. In addition to the
data above, our experimental protocol also includes the Permuted MNIST and
Split MNIST datasets, since they are two of the most used benchmarks in the
papers surveyed in our review. Table 4 summarizes the main characteristics of
the benchmarks used in the experiments, while Figure 4 provides a graphical
representation of their patterns. Figure 5 highlights how our class-incremental
benchmarks were created starting from the dataset classes.
Synthetic Speech Commands (SSC). SSC is a dataset of audio recordings of
spokenwords[15]. Eachaudiorepresentsasingleword,takenfromavocabulary
of30words, sampledat16kHz. Wepreprocessedeachsampletoextract40Mel
coefficients using a sliding window length of 25 ms, with 10 ms stride. The
resulting sequences have a fixed length of 101 timesteps. We did not apply any
further normalization. We create a Class Incremental scenario (SIT+NC) from
SSCbylearningtwoclassesatatime,foratotalnumberof10steps. Formodel
selection and assessment, we used a total of 16 classes out of the 30 available
ones.
AdditionaldetailsontheuseofSSCintheexperimentsarereportedinAppendix
B.1.
Quick, Draw! (QD). QDisadatasetofhand-drawnsketches,groupedinto345
classes [52]. Each drawing is a sequence of pen strokes, where each stroke has
3 features: x and y displacements with respect to the previous stroke and a bit
indicating if the pen has been lifted. We adopted a Class-incremental scenario
(SIT+NC)bytaking2classesatatimeforatotalnumberof10steps. Formodel
selection and assessment, we used a total of 16 classes out of the 345 available
ones. Appendix B.2providesdetailsabouttheclassesusedintheexperiments.
Differently from the previous datasets Quick, Draw! sequences have variable
length. Since this is often the case in real-world applications, it is important to
assess the performance of recurrent models in this configuration.
Permuted MNIST (PMNIST). PMNISTisheavilyusedtotrainrecurrentneu-
ralnetworksonlongsequences[69]. EachMNISTimageistreatedasasequence
of pixels and shuffled according to a fixed permutation. Each step of the data
stream uses a different permutation to preprocess the images and uses all the
10 MNIST classes. This allows to easily create an unlimited number of steps.
This configuration corresponds to a Domain incremental scenario (SIT+NI).
17
SSC QD SMNIST PMNIST
CL Steps 10 10 5 10
Classes per step 2 2 2 2
Sequence length 101 variable (8-211) 28/196 28/196
Total number of classes 30 345 10 10
Input size 40 3 28/4 28/4
Table 4: Benchmarks used in the experimental evaluation. QuickD, Draw has patterns with
variable sequencelength,fromaminimumof8stepstoamaximumof211steps
. Experiments with SMNIST and PMNIST have been conducted with different
sequence lengths by taking 28 or 4 pixels at a time, resulting in sequences of
length 28 and 196, respectively.
Split MNIST (SMNIST). SMNIST is another popular continual adpatation of
sequential MNIST. In this scenario, MNIST sequences are taken two classes at
atime. First, all0sand1sarefedtothemodel. Then, all2sand3s. Andsoon
andsoforthuptothelastpair(8and9). Thisscenarioconsistsofonly5steps.
The configuration corresponds to a Class Incremental benchmark (SIT+NC).
5. An Experimental Protocol for CL in SDP Domains
In the following section we describe the experimental settings that we pro-
posetorobustlyassessCLstrategieswithinSDPtasksandthatareusedinthe
experiments discussed in the following2.
Model Selection. Hyperparametertuningisacriticalphasewhenbuildingsolid
machine learning based predictors. This process is made considerably more
difficult in CL scenarios, since we cannot assume to have a separate validation
setcomprisingtheentirestreamofdatainadvance. Asaresult,itisnotpossible
tobuildthestandardtrain-validation-splitusedinmodelselection. Tosolvethis
problem,wefollowthemodelselectionprocedureforCLintroducedin[20]. We
separate the data stream into validation and test steps. In particular, we hold
out the first 3 steps from our data stream and use them to perform model
selection. After selecting the best hyperparameters, we use the remainder of
the stream (the test stream, composed of 10 unseen steps in our experiments),
toperformmodelassessment. SinceSplitMNISThasalimitednumberofsteps
(5), we decided to perform model selection and model assessment on the same
datastreamforthisparticularbenchmark. Appendix Areportstheparameters
used in the model selection procedure and the selected configurations for both
feedforward and recurrent models.
2Wepublishthecodeandconfigurationfilesneededtoreproduceourexperimentsatthis
linkhttps://github.com/AndreaCossu/ContinualLearning_RecurrentNetworks
18
20
15
15
10
10
5
5
(a)SSC (b)Quick,Draw!
(c)RowMNIST (d)PermutedRowMNIST
Figure 4: Graphical representation of two patterns for each benchmark used in the experi-
ments. Fig. 4a SSC uses 40 Mel features (columns) for each of the 101 steps (rows). Both
plots use log values. Fig. 4b provides sketches of images (cat and airplane). Fig. 4c shows
MNISTdigits,whichareprovidedtothemodelonerowatatimeintheRowMNISTversion.
PermutedMNIST(Fig. 4d)permutesimagesrow-wise. Bestviewedincolor.
Data Preprocessing. Preprocessing a dataset in a CL setting suffers from the
same limitations highlighted for the model selection phase. Computing global
statistics such as the mean and variance require the entire stream, which is not
available beforehand. As a result, we cannot operate any kind of normalization
that needs access to a global statistic, since do not have access to the entire
stream in advance. For MNIST data we simply divided the pixel value for 255,
which does not require any prior knowledge about the data stream (only about
the limits of the data generating device).
Models. The reference recurrent model that we use in our experiments is the
popular Long Short-Term Memory network (LSTM) [59] (PyTorch implemen-
tation [93]). LSTMs are among the most used recurrent models [24] and their
performance is comparable to other alternatives, like Gated Recurrent Units
[23]. Therefore, wedecidedtouseLSTMasgeneralrepresentativesofrecurrent
architectures.
To provide a means of comparison between feedforward and recurrent models,
we also consider and experiment with Multi Layer Perceptrons (MLP) with
ReLU activations. Notice that the feedforward models take as input the entire
sequence, therefore, they can be viewed as recurrent networks which receive se-
quences of length 1. This alternative view over these models is useful since we
19
Step 1 MODEL 1
Step 2 MODEL 2
Step 3 MODEL 3
Figure 5: Class-incremental benchmark with 3 steps starting from the patterns of Quick,
Draw! dataset. Eachstepiscomposedby2classes.
experimented with multiple sequence lengths. On PMNIST and SMNIST, we
ran experiments with LSTM which takes as input 4 pixels at a time (LSTM-4),
16 pixels at a time (LSTM-16) and 28 pixels at a time (ROW-LSTM).
PerformanceMetrics. Inordertoassesstheperformanceofthecontinuallearn-
ingstrategieswechosetofocusoncatastrophicforgettingbymeasuringtheav-
erage accuracy over all steps at the end of training on last step T. This metric,
called ACC [79], can been formalized as:
T
1 (cid:88)
ACC = R , (9)
T,t
T
t=1
where R is the accuracy on step t after training on step T. In Appendix A.1
T,t
we also compare execution times in order to assess the computational efficiency
of different strategies.
Strategies. We compare the performances of our models in combination with
6 CL strategies: EWC [64], MAS [3], LwF [75], GEM [79], A-GEM [20] and
Replay.
Inadditiontothecontinuallearningstrategies,weprovidetwobaselines. Naive
trains the model on the sequence without applying any measure against forget-
ting. Itisusefultoprovidesalower-boundtoanyreasonableCLstrategy. Joint
Training trains the model by considering the concatenation of the full stream
of sequential tasks in a single batch3. Notice that this is not a CL strategy
since it assumes access to the entire data stream. Joint Training can be used to
highlight the effect of the continuous training on the model performance.
3Joint Training is often used as an upper bound performance for CL. However, in the
presenceofastrongpositiveforwardandbackwardtransferthismaynotbetrue.
20
PMNIST MLP ROW-LSTM LSTM-4
EWC 0.92 0.58 0.29
±0.02 ±0.09 ±0.05
LWF 0.82 0.77 0.35
±0.03 ±0.05 ±0.04
MAS 0.58 0.64 0.31
±0.04 ±0.07 ±0.04
GEM 0.94 0.90 0.71
±0.01 ±0.01 ±0.02
A-GEM 0.80 0.58 0.20
±0.03 ±0.08 ±0.03
REPLAY 0.92 0.92 0.82
±0.00 ±0.01 ±0.01
NAIVE 0.31 0.61 0.30
±0.04 ±0.06 ±0.03
Joint Training 0.97 0.96 0.94
±0.00 ±0.00 ±0.01
SMNIST MLP ROW-LSTM LSTM-4
EWC 0.21 0.21 0.19
±0.01 ±0.02 ±0.00
LWF 0.70 0.31 0.26
±0.02 ±0.07 ±0.06
GEM 0.91 0.93 0.66
±0.01 ±0.03 ±0.04
A-GEM 0.20 0.20 0.13
±0.00 ±0.00 ±0.02
MAS 0.20 0.20 0.19
±0.00 ±0.00 ±0.00
REPLAY 0.82 0.89 0.61
±0.02 ±0.01 ±0.06
NAIVE 0.20 0.20 0.19
±0.00 ±0.00 ±0.00
Joint Training 0.95 0.97 0.95
±0.00 ±0.00 ±0.01
Table 5: Mean ACC and standard deviation over 5 runs on PMNIST and SMNIST bench-
marks.
6. Results
Weranasetofexperimentsaimedatverifying1)whethergeneralCLstrate-
gies are able to mitigate forgetting in recurrent models and 2) the effect of se-
quence length on the catastrophic forgetting. Table 5 reports the mean ACC
and its standard deviation (over 5 runs) computed on PMNIST and SMNIST.
Table 6 reports the same results computed on SSC and QD.
6.1. Catastrophic Forgetting with CL strategies
In Class-incremental scenarios, importance-based regularization strategies
are subjected to a complete forgetting, as also showed by [72] for feedforward
models. We confirmed their results also for recurrent models.The effectiveness
of replay in SIT scenario is also confirmed by our experiments.
GEM emerges as one of the best performing approaches not only for SM-
NIST and PMNIST, but also for the more complex SSC and QD. However, its
computationalcostremainsverylarge(asshowedinAppendix A.1),duetothe
quadratic optimization requested to find a projecting direction. Unfortunately,
its more efficient version A-GEM results in complete forgetting. This is caused
by the fact that A-GEM is not constrained by each previous steps, but instead,
itcomputesanapproximationoftheconstraintsbysamplingpatternsrandomly
21
SSC MLP LSTM
EWC 0.10 0.10
±0.00 ±0.00
LWF 0.05 0.12
±0.00 ±0.01
MAS 0.10 0.10
±0.00 ±0.00
GEM 0.55 0.53
±0.00 ±0.01
A-GEM 0.05 0.09
±0.00 ±0.01
REPLAY 0.81 0.73
±0.03 ±0.04
NAIVE 0.10 0.10
±0.00 ±0.00
Joint Training 0.93 0.89
±0.00 ±0.02
QD LSTM
EWC 0.12
±0.02
LWF 0.12
±0.01
MAS 0.10
±0.00
GEM 0.47
±0.03
A-GEM 0.10
±0.00
REPLAY 0.49
±0.02
NAIVE 0.10
±0.00
Joint Training 0.96
±0.00
Table6: MeanACCandstandarddeviationover5runsonSyntheticSpeechCommandsand
Quick,Draw! benchmarks.
fromthememory. WhilethismaybesufficientinaMTscenario,itdoesnotwork
appropriately in a SIT scenario.
LwF has been the most difficult strategy to use, requiring a careful tuning
ofhyperparameterswhichquestionsitsapplicabilitytoreal-worldenvironment.
WhileitworksonSMNIST,itsperformancerapidlydecreasesonmorecomplex
benchmarks like SSC and QD, where it suffers from complete forgetting.
6.2. Sequence Length affects Catastrophic Forgetting
Our experiments on PMNIST and SMNIST also allow to draw some con-
clusions on the effect of sequence length on forgetting. Fig. 6 shows mean
ACC results for different sequence lengths. The decreasing trends highlights a
clear phenomenon: long sequences cause more forgetting in recurrent networks.
Regularization strategies suffer the most when increasing sequence length.
Figure 7 offers some insights also on replay: although more robust than the
other strategies in terms of final performance, replay needs more patterns to
recover from forgetting as sequences become longer.
The results on PMNIST with MAS may seem to contradict the sequence-
length effect, since ROW-LSTM performs surprisingly better than MLP. How-
ever,theperformancehastobemeasuredrelativelytotheNaiveperformance,in
whichnoCLstrategyisapplied. Whencomparedtothisvalue,theROW-LSTM
22
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP(
R
1)
O
W-LST M
L
(
S
2
T
8) M-16(4
L
9
S
)
T
M-4(196)
Model(SequenceLength)
CCA
lwf mas replay-10
gem ewc replay-1
agem
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP(
R
1)
O
W-LST M
L
(
S
2
T
8) M-16(4
L
9
S
)
T
M-4(196)
Model(SequenceLength)
(a)PermutedMNIST
CCA
lwf replay-10
gem replay-1
(b)SplitMNIST
Figure6: AverageACConallstepsfordifferentsequencelengthsanddifferentCLstrategies.
Sequencelengthcausesadecreaseinperformancesamongallstrategies. Bestviewedincolor.
does not perform any better than MLP. Instead it achieves a worse accuracy
with respect to the Naive, as expected. The MAS-Naive ratio is 1.87 for MLP,
but only 1.05 for MAS.
6.3. Comparison between Multi-Head and Single-Head Models
Although in this work we focused on Class Incremental and Domain Incre-
mentalscenarios,wealsoprovideacomparisonwithTask-Incrementalscenarios
(MT + NC). Figure 8 shows results for the same experimental configuration in
Section 6, but with a multi-head model instead of a single-head. We did not
test multi-head models in PMNIST since this benchmark always uses the same
outputunitsforalltasks. Appendix CreportsTableC.13withdetailedresults.
There is a clear difference between single and multi-head performances. A
multi-head setting easily prevents CF: even a simple Naive procedure is able to
retainmostoftheknowledgeinbothclass-incrementalscenarios. Theinfluence
of sequence length in single-headed models is not reflected in the multi-head
case. In fact, the LSTM performs better than MLP on SSC: this could be
related to the fact that, given the already large mitigation of forgetting with
multi-head, the sequential nature of the problem favours a recurrent network.
WeconcludedthatMTscenarioswithmulti-headmodelsshouldbeusedonly
whenthereistheneedtoachievehigh-levelperformancesinenvironmentswhere
tasks are easily distinguishable. However, task label information should never
be used to derive general conclusions about the behavior and performance of
CL algorithms.
23
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1 10 20
Replaypatternsperminibatch
CCA
MLP LSTM-16
LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1 10 20
Replaypatternsperminibatch
(a)PermutedMNIST
CCA
MLP LSTM-16
LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(b)SplitMNIST
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1 10 20
Replaypatternsperminibatch
CCA
MLP LSTM
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1 10 20
Replaypatternsperminibatch
(c)SSC
CCA
LSTM
(d)QD
Figure7: AverageACCfordifferentreplaypatternsperminibatch. Thelongertheinputse-
quence,themorethepatternsneededtorecovertheperformance. Quick,Draw! performance
does not change significantly with respect to replay patterns in the minibatch. Best viewed
incolor.
7. Research Directions
The problem of learning continuously on sequential data processing tasks is
far from being solved. Fortunately, the recent interest in the topic is fostering
the discovery of new solutions and a better understanding of the phenomena
at play. We believe that our work could play an important role in sketching
promising research directions.
Leveraging existing CL strategies. From our experiments, it is clear that some
familiesofCLstrategiesarebettersuitedtotheClass-incrementalscenariothan
others (e.g. GEM mitigates forgetting across all benchmarks while EWC per-
forms poorly in class-incremental settings). Instead of designing entirely new
approaches, it could be better to start building from the existing ones. Replay
offers a simple and effective solution, but storing previous patterns may not be
possibleinallenvironments. ItwouldbeinterestingtoextendLwFwithknowl-
edge distillation algorithms specifically designed for recurrent networks. De-
pending on the effectiveness of the distillation, results could drastically change.
Even if architectural strategies have not been part of our study, they can be an
important part of the research. In particular, they may be a valid option when
24
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
ewc agem naive
CCA
MLPmulti-head MLPsingle-head
LSTM-4multi-head LSTM-4single-head
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
ewc agem naive
(a)SplitMNIST
CCA
MLPmulti-head MLPsingle-head
LSTMmulti-head LSTMsingle-head
(b)SyntheticSpeechCommands
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
ewc agem naive
CCA
LSTMmulti-head LSTMsingle-head
(c)Quick,Draw!
Figure8: Barplotcomparingmulti-headandsingle-headperformances. Bestviewedincolor.
all other approaches struggle. In fact, task-specific components or freezing of
previousparameterscanremoveforgettingbydesign. Theusuallylargecompu-
tational cost can be mitigated by pruning. Combining pruning techniques for
RNNs with dynamic architectures may open a new topic of research in CL.
Improving recurrent models. Theroleofsequencelengthincontinuouslearning
processes can be investigated under different points of view. From the point of
viewofdynamicalsystems,thelearningtrajectoryfollowedbyarecurrentmodel
can be studied in terms of different regimes (chaotic, edge-of-chaos, attractors)
[18]. Longer sequences would produce longer trajectories which could make the
Continual Learning problem more difficult. Inspecting and interpreting these
trajectories could in turn foster the design of new regularization strategies to
constrain the learning path. Instead, from an experimental point of view, the
optimization problem that has to be solved by recurrent networks is highly
dependent on the sequence length. For example, the Backpropagation Through
Time has to propagate information from the end of the sequence to the very
beginning in order to compute gradients. Some of the obstacles encountered by
many strategies in our experimental analysis may be overcome by alternative
learning algorithms, for example Truncated Backpropagation.
Designofrealisticscenarios. ThecomplexityoftheCLenvironmentsisanother
important topic to address in future researches. Providing target labels to the
system each time a new pattern arrives is often too expensive, even unrealistic.
Instead, sequences are able to work with sparse targets [49]. Sequential data
processingmayleadtomoreautonomoussystemsinwhichtherequiredlevelof
25
supervision is drastically reduced.
Our proposed benchmarks could contribute to realize such scenario through a
stream of realistic patterns, resembling what an agent would experience in the
real world. To build this setting, it could be required to concatenate multiple
commands from SSC or multiple drawings from QD, possibly interleaved with
noisypatterns. Thisonlinescenariowouldfreethemodelfromthenecessityto
learn over multiple passes over the data. Instead, the environment itself would
providenewinstancesandnewclasses(SIT+NIC)whichcanbeexperiencedone
(or few) at a time. With this achievement, CL models could seamlessly be
integrated in many real world applications.
8. Conclusion
InthisworkwefocusedonContinualLearninginRecurrentNeuralNetwork
models. First, we reviewed the literature and proposed a taxonomy of contri-
butions. We also analysed and organized the benchmarks and datasets used in
CL for sequential data processing.
Thenumberofexistingbenchmarkscomparedtotherelativelysmallnumberof
contributions revealed that most papers proposed their own model and tested
it on datasets which are almost never reused in subsequent works. Therefore,
we discussed the opportunity to build standard benchmarks and, in addition,
we proposed two new CL benchmarks based on existing datasets: Synthetic
Speech Commands (SSC) and Quick, Draw! (QD). Both datasets are specifi-
callytailoredtoSequentialDataProcessingandaregeneralenoughtobemodel
agnostic.
From the literature review, we also found out that all available works focus on
newCLstrategieswithcustomizedarchitectures,oftenforaspecializeddomain.
The different experimental setups prevent a comparison of multiple approaches
and there is little information about how recurrent networks behave with gen-
eral CL strategies.
Tofillthisgap,werananextensiveexperimentalanalysiswithsingle-headmod-
els focused on Class-Incremental scenarios. We compared traditional LSTMs
against feedforward networks on 6 popular CL strategies. Our main finding
shows increasing forgetting as sequences are made artificially longer without
modifying their content. Even replay strategies, which are the most robust
among the considered methods, are subjected to this phenomenon. This holds
also for Domain-incremental scenarios with Permuted MNIST.
The effect of sequence length on the final performance may be questioned by
results presented in [34]: the authors found the working memory (the amount
of features needed to address a task) to be the main driving factor in the per-
formance of recurrent models. In our work, we showed that, with fixed working
memory,sequencelengthplaysarole. Thesetwoconclusionsarenotdirectlyin
contrast with each other, because the experiments of [34] have been conducted
on either a MT+NC scenarios with multi-head models or on simpler scenarios like
Domain-incremental. This difficulty in comparing results confirms the need for
our large-scale evaluation.
26
Finally, to justify our choice of Class-incremental scenarios, we ran additional
experimentswithmulti-headmodelsinTask-incrementalscenarios. Weverified
that a multi-head approach greatly simplifies the problem in both feedforward
and recurrent architectures. However, this comes at the cost of a strong as-
sumption on task label knowledge.
Concluding, we entered into a discussion of interesting research paths inspired
by our findings on the topic of Continual Learning in sequential domains. We
believe that addressing such challenges will make Continual Learning more ef-
fective in realistic environments, where sequential data processing is the most
natural way to acquire and process new information across a lifetime.
Acknowledgments
WethanktheContinualAIassociationandallofitsmembersforthefruitful
discussions.
Funding
ThisworkhasbeenpartiallysupportedbytheEuropeanCommunityH2020
programme under project TEACHING (grant n. 871385).
References
[1] Subutai Ahmad and Jeff Hawkins. How do neurons operate on sparse
distributed representations? A mathematical theory of sparsity, neurons
and active dendrites. arXiv, pages 1–23, 2016.
[2] Hongjoon Ahn, Sungmin Cha, Donggyu Lee, and Taesup Moon.
Uncertainty-based Continual Learning with Adaptive Regularization. In
NeurIPS, pages 4392–4402, 2019.
[3] Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus
Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Memory Aware Synapses: Learning
what (not) to forget. In The European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2018.
[4] Rahaf Aljundi, Eugene Belilovsky, Tinne Tuytelaars, Laurent Charlin,
Massimo Caccia, Min Lin, and Lucas Page-Caccia. Online Continual
Learning with Maximal Interfered Retrieval. In NeurIPS, pages 11849–
11860. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[5] Rahaf Aljundi, Klaas Kelchtermans, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Task-Free
Continual Learning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
[6] Rahaf Aljundi, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Selfless Sequen-
tial Learning. In ICLR, 2019.
27
[7] Giuseppe Amato, Davide Bacciu, Stefano Chessa, Mauro Dragone, Clau-
dioGallicchio,ClaudioGennaro,HectorLozano,AlessioMicheli,Gregory
M.P.O’Hare,ArantxaRenteria,andClaudioVairo.Abenchmarkdataset
for human activity recognition and ambient assisted living. In Helena
Lindgren, Juan F. De Paz, Paulo Novais, Antonio Fern´andez-Caballero,
Hyun Yoe, Andres Jim´enez Ram´ırez, and Gabriel Villarrubia, editors,
Ambient Intelligence- Software and Applications – 7th International Sym-
posium on Ambient Intelligence (ISAmI 2016), pages 1–9. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2016.
[8] Bernard Ans, St´ephane Rousset, Robert M. French, and Serban Musca.
Self-refreshing memory in artificial neural networks: Learning temporal
sequences without catastrophic forgetting. Connection Science, 16(2):71–
99, 2004.
[9] BernardAns,StephaneRousset,RobertM.French,andSerbanC.Musca.
PreventingCatastrophicInterferenceinMultipleSequenceLearningUsing
Coupled Reverberating Elman Networks. In Proceedings of the 24th An-
nual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2002.
[10] Nabiha Asghar, Lili Mou, Kira A Selby, Kevin D Pantasdo, Pascal
Poupart, and Xin Jiang. Progressive Memory Banks for Incremental Do-
main Adaptation. In ICLR, 2019.
[11] DzmitryBahdanau,KyunghyunCho,andYoshuaBengio.NeuralMachine
Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate. ICLR, 2015.
[12] Shawn Beaulieu, Lapo Frati, Thomas Miconi, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O.
Stanley, Jeff Clune, and Nick Cheney. Learning to Continually Learn. In
ECAI, 2020.
[13] Magdalena Biesialska, Katarzyna Biesialska, and Marta R. Costa-juss`a.
Continual Lifelong Learning in Natural Language Processing: A Survey.
In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pages 6523–6541, Barcelona, Spain (Online), 2020. Interna-
tional Committee on Computational Linguistics.
[14] Ondˇrej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee, Christian Federmann, Yvette Graham,
Barry Haddow, Shujian Huang, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Qun Liu,
VarvaraLogacheva,ChristofMonz,MatteoNegri,MattPost,RaphaelRu-
bino, Lucia Specia, and Marco Turchi. Findings of the 2017 Conference
on Machine Translation (WMT17). In Proceedings of the Second Con-
ference on Machine Translation, pages 169–214, Copenhagen, Denmark,
2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[15] Johannes Buchner. Synthetic Speech Commands: A public dataset for
single-word speech recognition. Kaggle Dataset, 2017.
28
[16] MassimoCaccia,PauRodriguez,OleksiyOstapenko,FabriceNormandin,
Min Lin, Lucas Caccia, Issam Laradji, Irina Rish, Alexande Lacoste,
DavidVazquez,andLaurentCharlin. OnlineFastAdaptationandKnowl-
edgeAccumulation: ANewApproachtoContinualLearning. arXiv,2020.
[17] AntonioCarta,AndreaCossu,FedericoErrica,andDavideBacciu. Catas-
trophicForgettinginDeepGraphNetworks: AnIntroductoryBenchmark
for Graph Classification. The 2021 Web Conference (WWW) Workshop
on Graph Benchmarks Learning (GLB), 2021.
[18] Andrea Ceni, Peter Ashwin, and Lorenzo Livi. Interpreting Recurrent
Neural Networks Behaviour via Excitable Network Attractors. Cognitive
Computation, 12(2):330–356, 2020.
[19] Arslan Chaudhry, Puneet K. Dokania, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and
Philip H. S. Torr. Riemannian Walk for Incremental Learning: Under-
standing Forgetting and Intransigence. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 532–547, 2018.
[20] Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mo-
hamed Elhoseiny. Efficient Lifelong Learning with A-GEM. In ICLR,
2019.
[21] Dechao Chen, Shuai Li, and Liefa Liao. A recurrent neural network ap-
pliedtooptimalmotioncontrolofmobilerobotswithphysicalconstraints.
Applied Soft Computing, 85:105880, December 2019.
[22] Tianqi Chen, Ian Goodfellow, and Jonathon Shlens. Net2Net: Accelerat-
ing Learning via Knowledge Transfer. In ICLR, 2016.
[23] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merri¨enboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua
Bengio. On the Properties of Neural Machine Translation: En-
coder–Decoder Approaches. In Proceedings of SSST-8, Eighth Workshop
on Syntax, Semantics and Structure in Statistical Translation,pages103–
111, Doha, Qatar, 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[24] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence
modeling. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning, 2014.
[25] Robert Coop and Itamar Arel. Mitigation of catastrophic interference
in neural networks using a fixed expansion layer. In 2012 IEEE 55th
International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS),
pages 726–729. IEEE, 2012.
[26] Robert Coop and Itamar Arel. Mitigation of catastrophic forgetting in
recurrent neural networks using a Fixed Expansion Layer. In The 2013
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–7,
Dallas, TX, USA, 2013. IEEE.
29
[27] Andrea Cossu, Antonio Carta, and Davide Bacciu. Continual Learning
with Gated Incremental Memories for sequential data processing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN 2020), 2020.
[28] Yuwei Cui, Subutai Ahmad, and Jeff Hawkins. Continuous Online Se-
quence Learning with an Unsupervised Neural Network Model. Neural
Computation, 28(11):2474–2504, 2016.
[29] Edwin D. de Jong. Incremental Sequence Learning. arXiv: 1611.03068
[cs], 2016.
[30] Matthias De Lange, Rahaf Aljundi, Marc Masana, Sarah Parisot, Xu Jia,
Ales Leonardis, Gregory Slabaugh, and Tinne Tuytelaars. A continual
learning survey: Defying forgetting in classification tasks. arXiv, 2019.
[31] Gregory Ditzler, Manuel Roveri, Cesare Alippi, and Robi Polikar. Learn-
ing in Nonstationary Environments: A Survey. IEEE Computational In-
telligence Magazine, 10(4):12–25, 2015.
[32] Lea Duncker, Laura N Driscoll, Krishna V Shenoy, Maneesh Sahani,
and David Sussillo. Organizing recurrent network dynamics by task-
computation to enable continual learning. In NeurIPS, volume 33, 2020.
[33] Sayna Ebrahimi, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus
Rohrbach. Uncertainty-guided Continual Learning with Bayesian Neu-
ral Networks. In ICLR, 2020.
[34] Benjamin Ehret, Christian Henning, Maria R Cervera, Alexander Meule-
mans,JohannesvonOswald,andBenjaminFGrewe. ContinualLearning
in Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv, 2020.
[35] BenjaminEhret,ChristianHenning,MariaR.Cervera,AlexanderMeule-
mans,JohannesvonOswald,andBenjaminF.Grewe. ContinualLearning
inRecurrentNeuralNetworkswithHypernetworks. arXiv:2006.12109[cs,
stat], 2020.
[36] Jeffrey L. Elman. Finding Structure in Time. Cognitive Science,
14(2):179–211, 1990.
[37] SebastianFarquharandYarinGal.AUnifyingBayesianViewofContinual
Learning. In NeurIPS Bayesian Deep Learning Workshop, 2018.
[38] Sebastian Farquhar and Yarin Gal. Towards Robust Evaluations of Con-
tinualLearning.InPrivacyinMachineLearningandArtificialIntelligence
Workshop, ICML, 2019.
[39] Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine.
Online Meta-Learning. In ICML, 2019.
30
[40] Robert French. Using Semi-Distributed Representations to Overcome
Catastrophic Forgetting in Connectionist Networks. In In Proceedings
of the 13th Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference, pages 173–178.
Erlbaum, 1991.
[41] Robert French. Pseudo-recurrent Connectionist Networks: An Approach
to the ’Sensitivity-Stability’ Dilemma. Connection Science, 9(4):353–380,
1997.
[42] RobertFrench. UsingPseudo-RecurrentConnectionistNetworkstoSolve
the Problem of Sequential Learning. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual
Cognitive Science Society Conference, 1997.
[43] RobertFrench. Catastrophicforgettinginconnectionistnetworks. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 3(4):128–135, 1999.
[44] Robert M. French. Using Semi-Distributed Representations to Overcome
Catastrophic Forgetting in Connectionist Networks. In In Proceedings
of the 13th Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference, pages 173–178.
Erlbaum, 1991.
[45] Jo˜ao Gama, Indre˙ Zˇliobaite˙, Albert Bifet, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Ab-
delhamid Bouchachia. A survey on concept drift adaptation. ACM Com-
puting Surveys (CSUR), 46(4):44:1–44:37, 2014.
[46] J. F. Gemmeke, D. P. W. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen, W. Lawrence,
R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and M. Ritter. Audio Set: An ontology and
human-labeleddatasetforaudioevents. In2017IEEEInternationalCon-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),pages776–
780, 2017.
[47] SiavashGolkar,MichaelKagan,andKyunghyunCho. ContinualLearning
via Neural Pruning. arXiv, 2019.
[48] Alex Graves. Sequence Transduction with Recurrent Neural Networks.
arXiv, 2012.
[49] Alex Graves, Santiago Fern´andez, Faustino Gomez, and Ju¨rgen Schmid-
huber. Connectionist temporal classification: Labelling unsegmented se-
quence data with recurrent neural networks. In ICML, ICML ’06, pages
369–376, New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
[50] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural Turing Machines.
arXiv:1410.5401 [cs], 2014.
[51] Stephen Grossberg. How does a brain build a cognitive code? Psycholog-
ical Review, 87(1):1–51, 1980.
31
[52] DavidHaandDouglasEck. ANeuralRepresentationofSketchDrawings.
In ICLR, 2018.
[53] Michael Bonnell Harries, Claude Sammut, and Kim Horn. Extracting
Hidden Context. Machine Learning, 32(2):101–126, 1998.
[54] JamesHarrison,ApoorvaSharma,ChelseaFinn,andMarcoPavone. Con-
tinuous meta-learning without tasks. arXiv, 2019.
[55] Mahmudul Hasan and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury. A Continuous Learning
Framework for Activity Recognition Using Deep Hybrid Feature Models.
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 17(11):1909–1922, 2015.
[56] Tyler L Hayes, Nathan D Cahill, and Christopher Kanan. Memory Ef-
ficient Experience Replay for Streaming Learning. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018.
[57] XuHe,JakubSygnowski,AlexandreGalashov,AndreiARusu,YeeWhye
Teh, and Razvan Pascanu. Task Agnostic Continual Learning via Meta
Learning. arxiv, 2019.
[58] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the Knowl-
edge in a Neural Network. In NIPS Deep Learning and Representation
Learning Workshop, 2015.
[59] Sepp Hochreiter and Jurgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory.
Neural Computation, 9:1735–1780, 1997.
[60] TimothyHospedales,AntreasAntoniou,PaulMicaelli,andAmosStorkey.
Meta-LearninginNeuralNetworks: ASurvey.arXiv:2004.05439[cs,stat],
2020.
[61] Steven C Y Hung, Cheng-Hao Tu, Cheng-En Wu, Chien-Hung Chen, Yi-
Ming Chan, and Chu-Song Chen. Compacting, Picking and Growing for
Unforgetting Continual Learning. In NeurIPS, pages 13669–13679, 2019.
[62] Khurram Javed and Martha White. Meta-Learning Representations for
Continual Learning. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[63] Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Bruno Pouliquen, and Christophe Mazenc.
COPPA V2.0: Corpus of parallel patent applications. Building large par-
allel corpora with GNU make. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on
ChallengesintheManagementofLargeCorpora, Portoroˇz, Slovenia, May
23-28, 2016, 2016.
[64] James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guil-
laume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ra-
malho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath,
Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forget-
ting in neural networks. PNAS, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
32
[65] Taisuke Kobayashi and Toshiki Sugino. Continual Learning Exploiting
StructureofFractalReservoirComputing.InIgorVTetko,VˇeraK˚urkov´a,
Pavel Karpov, and Fabian Theis, editors, Artificial Neural Networks and
Machine Learning – ICANN 2019: Workshop and Special Sessions, vol-
ume 11731, pages 35–47, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.
[66] Germ´an Kruszewski, Ionut-Teodor Sorodoc, and Tomas Mikolov. Evalu-
ating Online Continual Learning with CALM. arXiv, 2020.
[67] RichardKurle,BotondCseke,AlexejKlushyn,PatrickvanderSmagt,and
StephanGu¨nnemann. ContinualLearningwithBayesianNeuralNetworks
for Non-Stationary Data. In ICLR, 2020.
[68] Aditya Kusupati, Manish Singh, Kush Bhatia, Ashish Kumar, Prateek
Jain, and Manik Varma. FastGRNN: A Fast, Accurate, Stable and Tiny
Kilobyte Sized Gated Recurrent Neural Network. arXiv:1901.02358 [cs,
stat], January 2019.
[69] Quoc V Le, Navdeep Jaitly, and Geoffrey E Hinton. A simple way
to initialize recurrent networks of rectified linear units. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.00941, 2015.
[70] YannLeCun,L´eonBottou,YoshuaBengio,andPatrickHaffner.Gradient-
Based Learning Applied to Document Recognition. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
[71] Timoth´ee Lesort, Vincenzo Lomonaco, Andrei Stoian, Davide Maltoni,
DavidFilliat,andNataliaD´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez.Continuallearningforrobotics:
Definition, framework, learning strategies, opportunities and challenges.
Information Fusion, 58:52–68, 2020.
[72] Timoth´eeLesort, AndreiStoian, andDavidFilliat. RegularizationShort-
comings for Continual Learning. arXiv, 2020.
[73] HongLin Li, Payam Barnaghi, Shirin Enshaeifar, and Frieder Ganz. Con-
tinual Learning Using Bayesian Neural Networks. arXiv, 2019.
[74] Yuanpeng Li, Liang Zhao, Kenneth Church, and Mohamed Elhoseiny.
Compositional Language Continual Learning. In ICLR, 2020.
[75] ZhizhongLiandDerekHoiem. LearningwithoutForgetting. InEuropean
Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, pages 614–629, 2016.
[76] PierreLison, J¨orgTiedemann, andMilenKouylekov. OpenSubtitles2018:
StatisticalRescoringofSentenceAlignmentsinLarge,NoisyParallelCor-
pora. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Language
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2018),pages1742–1748.EuropeanLan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA), 2018.
33
[77] Vincenzo Lomonaco and Davide Maltoni. CORe50: A New Dataset and
Benchmark for Continuous Object Recognition. In Sergey Levine, Vin-
cent Vanhoucke, and Ken Goldberg, editors, Proceedings of the 1st An-
nual Conference on Robot Learning, volume 78 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 17–26. PMLR, 2017.
[78] Vincenzo Lomonaco, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Andrea Cossu, Antonio Carta,
Gabriele Graffieti, Tyler L. Hayes, Matthias De Lange, Marc Masana,
JaryPomponi,GidovandeVen,MartinMundt,QiShe,KeilandCooper,
Jeremy Forest, Eden Belouadah, Simone Calderara, German I. Parisi,
Fabio Cuzzolin, Andreas Tolias, Simone Scardapane, Luca Antiga, Sub-
utai Amhad, Adrian Popescu, Christopher Kanan, Joost van de Weijer,
Tinne Tuytelaars, Davide Bacciu, and Davide Maltoni. Avalanche: An
End-to-End Library for Continual Learning. In CLVision Workshop at
CVPR, 2021.
[79] David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient Episodic Memory
for Continual Learning. In NIPS, 2017.
[80] MantasLukoˇseviˇciusandHerbertJaeger.Reservoircomputingapproaches
torecurrentneuralnetworktraining. ComputerScienceReview,3(3):127–
149, 2009.
[81] Avinash Madasu and Vijjini Anvesh Rao. Sequential Domain Adaptation
throughElasticWeightConsolidationforSentimentAnalysis.arXiv,2020.
[82] Davide Maltoni and Vincenzo Lomonaco. Continuous Learning in Single-
Incremental-Task Scenarios. Neural Networks, 116:56–73, 2019.
[83] James L. McClelland, Bruce L. McNaughton, and Andrew K. Lampinen.
Integration of new information in memory: New insights from a comple-
mentary learning systems perspective. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 375(1799):20190637, 2020.
[84] MichaelMcCloskeyandNealJ.Cohen. CatastrophicInterferenceinCon-
nectionist Networks: The Sequential Learning Problem. In Gordon H.
Bower, editor, Psychology of Learning and Motivation, volume 24, pages
109–165. Academic Press, 1989.
[85] Nikhil Mehta, Kevin J Liang, and Lawrence Carin. Bayesian Nonpara-
metric Weight Factorization for Continual Learning. arXiv, pages 1–17,
2020.
[86] Cuong V Nguyen, Yingzhen Li, Thang D Bui, and Richard E Turner.
Variational Continual Learning. In ICLR, 2018.
[87] Hung Nguyen, Xuejian Wang, and Leman Akoglu. Continual Rare-Class
Recognition with Emerging Novel Subclasses. In ECML, 2019.
34
[88] Alexander Ororbia. Spiking Neural Predictive Coding for Continual
Learning from Data Streams. arXiv, 2020.
[89] AlexanderOrorbia,AnkurMali,CLeeGiles,andDanielKifer. Continual
Learning of Recurrent Neural Networks by Locally Aligning Distributed
Representations. arXiv, 2019.
[90] Alexander Ororbia, Ankur Mali, Daniel Kifer, and C Lee Giles. Lifelong
NeuralPredictiveCoding: SparsityYieldsLessForgettingwhenLearning
Cumulatively. arXiv, pages 1–11, 2019.
[91] German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and
Stefan Wermter. Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A
review. Neural Networks, 113:54–71, 2019.
[92] German I Parisi, Jun Tani, Cornelius Weber, and Stefan Wermter. Life-
longLearningofSpatiotemporalRepresentationsWithDual-MemoryRe-
current Self-Organization. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 12, 2018.
[93] AdamPaszke,SamGross,FranciscoMassa,AdamLerer,JamesBradbury,
Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas K¨opf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito,
Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative
Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. NeurIPS, 2019.
[94] Daniel Philps, Artur d’Avila Garcez, and Tillman Weyde. Making Good
on LSTMs’ Unfulfilled Promise. arXiv, 2019.
[95] MarkBRing.CHILD:AFirstStepTowardsContinualLearning.Machine
Learning, 28(1):77–104, 1997.
[96] AnthonyRobins. CatastrophicForgetting;CatastrophicInterference;Sta-
bility; Plasticity; Rehearsal. Connection Science, 7(2):123–146, 1995.
[97] David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy P Lillicrap, and
Greg Wayne. Experience Replay for Continual Learning. In NeurIPS,
pages 350–360, 2019.
[98] Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer,
James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Had-
sell. Progressive Neural Networks. arXiv, 2016.
[99] AntonMaximilianSch¨aferandHansGeorgZimmermann. RecurrentNeu-
ral Networks Are Universal Approximators. In Stefanos D. Kollias, An-
dreas Stafylopatis, Wl(cid:32)odzisl(cid:32)aw Duch, and Erkki Oja, editors, Artificial
Neural Networks – ICANN 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 632–640. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
35
[100] Monika Schak and Alexander Gepperth. A Study on Catastrophic For-
getting in Deep LSTM Networks. In Igor V Tetko, Vˇera K˚urkov´a, Pavel
Karpov, and Fabian Theis, editors, Artificial Neural Networks and Ma-
chine Learning – ICANN 2019: Deep Learning, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 714–728. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2019.
[101] Jeffrey C. Schlimmer and Richard H. Granger. Incremental learning from
noisy data. Machine Learning, 1(3):317–354, 1986.
[102] Jonathan Schwarz, Wojciech Czarnecki, Jelena Luketina, Agnieszka
Grabska-Barwinska, Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell.
Progress & Compress: A scalable framework for continual learning. In
ICML, pages 4528–4537, 2018.
[103] Shagun Sodhani, Sarath Chandar, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward Training
Recurrent Neural Networks for Lifelong Learning. Neural Computation,
32(1):1–35, 2019.
[104] Ghada Sokar, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, and Mykola Pechenizkiy.
SpaceNet: Make Free Space For Continual Learning. arXiv, 2020.
[105] Fan-Keng Sun, Cheng-Hao Ho, and Hung-Yi Lee. LAMOL: LAnguage
MOdeling for Lifelong Language Learning. In ICLR, 2020.
[106] Binh Tang and David S. Matteson. Graph-Based Continual Learning. In
ICLR, 2020.
[107] Brian Thompson, Jeremy Gwinnup, Huda Khayrallah, Kevin Duh, and
Philipp Koehn. Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting During Domain
Adaptation of Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers), pages 2062–2068, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
[108] Mariya Toneva, Alessandro Sordoni, Remi Tachet des Combes, Adam
Trischler, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey J Gordon. An Empirical Study
of Example Forgetting during Deep Neural Network Learning. In ICLR,
2019.
[109] Gido M. van de Ven, Hava T. Siegelmann, and Andreas S. Tolias. Brain-
inspired replay for continual learning with artificial neural networks. Na-
ture Communications, 11, 2020.
[110] Gido M. van de Ven and Andreas S. Tolias. Generative replay with feed-
backconnectionsasageneralstrategyforcontinuallearning. arXiv,2018.
[111] Gido M van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual
learning. In Continual Learning Workshop NeurIPS, 2018.
36
[112] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N Gomez, L(cid:32) ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is
AllyouNeed. InI.Guyon,U.V.Luxburg,S.Bengio,H.Wallach,R.Fer-
gus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, NIPS, pages 5998–6008.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[113] Johannes von Oswald, Christian Henning, Jo&#xE3, O Sacramento, and
Benjamin F. Grewe. Continual learning with hypernetworks. In ICLR,
2019.
[114] A.Waibel,T.Hanazawa,G.Hinton,K.Shikano,andK.J.Lang.Phoneme
recognition using time-delay neural networks. IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 37(3):328–339, 1989.
[115] ZhepeiWang,CemSubakan,EfthymiosTzinis,ParisSmaragdis,andLau-
rent Charlin. Continual Learning of New Sound Classes using Generative
Replay. arXiv, 2019.
[116] GerhardWidmerandMiroslavKubat.Learninginthepresenceofconcept
drift and hidden contexts. Machine Learning, 23(1):69–101, 1996.
[117] Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A Broad-Coverage
Challenge Corpus for Sentence Understanding through Inference. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana,
2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[118] Thomas Wolf, Julien Chaumond, and Clement Delangue. Continuous
Learning in a Hierarchical Multiscale Neural Network. In ACL, 2018.
[119] Jiabin Xue, Jiqing Han, Tieran Zheng, Xiang Gao, and Jiaxing Guo. A
Multi-TaskLearningFrameworkforOvercomingtheCatastrophicForget-
ting in Automatic Speech Recognition. arXiv, 2019.
[120] Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong
Learning With Dynamically Expandable Networks. In ICLR, 2018.
[121] TYoung,DevamanyuHazarika,SPoria,andECambria.RecentTrendsin
DeepLearningBasedNaturalLanguageProcessing. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine, 13:55–75, 2018.
[122] Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual Learning
Through Synaptic Intelligence. In ICML, pages 3987–3995, 2017.
[123] Chen Zeno, Itay Golan, Elad Hoffer, and Daniel Soudry. Task Agnostic
ContinualLearningUsingOnlineVariationalBayes. InNeurIPSBayesian
Deep Learning Workshop, 2018.
37
Appendix A. Experiment configuration
Here we report additional details on the experiments configuration.
Each step is divided into a training set and a test set. We used the default
train-testsplitofTorchvisionforMNIST-baseddatasets. ForSSCwerandomly
generate a train-test split for each class, with 20% of patterns for the test set.
Quick, Draw! already provides separate splits for each class. We changed ran-
dom seed on each run.
To make training stabler with RNNs, we used a fixed permutation on SMNIST
which does not change across steps. This uniformly spreads the information
along the sequence.
Following the original paper, A-GEM concatenates a one-hot task vector to the
input patterns. Since we adopt class-incremental scenarios, we concatenate the
vector only at training time. On SSC, we leveraged the Avalanche library [78]
for the GEM implementation.
We tested a wide range of hyperparameters for the grid search, as showed by
Table A.7 for PMNIST, Table A.8 for SMNIST, Table A.9 for SSC and Table
A.10forQD.Thetablesusethefollowingabbreviations: numberoflayersisnl,
number of hidden units is hs, minibatch size is mbs, optimizer is opt, learning
rate is lr, patterns per step in GEM memory is pps, sample size from A-GEM
memory is ss, softmax temperature in LwF is T. MLPs are with ReLU activa-
tions. LSTMs have 1 layer for MNIST-based benchmarks, 2 layers for SSC and
Quick, Draw!. LSTM with QD uses 512 hidden units. Multi-head experiments
use the same configuration.
All models use gradient clipping at norm 5. The number of epochs is set to
guarantee convergence except for online methods (GEM, A-GEM) which use 2
epochs and minibatches of 10 patterns. The default optimizer is Adam with no
regularization.
Appendix A.1. Computational Complexity
We monitored execution times for recurrent architectures with different CL
strategies. WeranexperimentsonasingleV100GPU,with3threadsatatime
® ®
on a Intel Xeon Gold 6140M CPU with 2.30GHz frequency.
Our results clearly show that the cost of GEM is quite large and may be pro-
hibitive in realistic applications.
Appendix B. Benchmarks Description
Appendix B.1. Synthetic Speech Commands
WeintroducedtheSyntheticSpeechCommands(SSC)[15]benchmark4 and
adapted it for a class-incremental setting. We took 2 classes at a time and we
4The Synthetic Speec Commands Dataset is available at https://www.kaggle.com/
jbuchner/synthetic-speech-commands-dataset
38
PMNIST LSTM MLP
EWC λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100), λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100),
hs=(256, 512) nl=(1,2), hs=512
MAS λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100), λ=(0.1, 1, 10),
mbs=(64,128), hs=(256, mbs=(32,64,128), lr=(1e-2,
512) 1e-3), nl=1, hs=512
GEM pps=(64, 128, 256), pps=(64, 128, 256),
γ=(0.5, 1), lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), γ=(0.5, 1), lr=(1e-1, 1e-2,
hs=256 1e-3), nl=(1,2), hs=512
A-GEM patterns per step i pps=(64, 128, 256),
memory=(64, 128, 256), ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-1,
ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-2, 1e-2, 1e-3), nl=(1,2),
1e-3), hs=256 hs=5120
LwF α=(0.1, 1), hs=256, α=(0.1, 1), nl=(1,2),
T=(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2), hs=512, T=(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2),
opt=(sgd, adam), opt=(sgd, adam),
lr=(1e-3, 1e-4) mbs=(64, 128), lr=(1e-2,
1e-3)
Replay lr=(1e-3, 1e-4), hs=(256, lr=(1e-3, 1e-4),
512) hs=(128,256), nl=1
Naive hs=(256, 512), lr=(1e-3, hs=(256,512), nl=1
1e-4)
Joint Training lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), mbs=128, hs=(256, 512), nl=1
hs=512
TableA.7: HyperparameterselectiononPMNIST.Gridsearchhasbeenperformedforallthe
combinationsinparenthesis. Boldnotationindicatesbesthyperparametervalue. Seethetext
inAppendix Aforexplanationoftheabbreviationsusedinthistable.
created sequences of 3 steps for model selection and sequences of 10 steps for
modelassessment. WepreprocessedeachaudiowithaMelSpectrogramwith10
ms hop length, 25 ms window size and 40 MFCCs features.
Table B.11 following, we report statistics for all the 30 classes in the dataset.
Appendix B.2. Quick, Draw!
Quick, Draw! dataset has been downloaded from Google Cloud Console, in
the sketchrnn folder5. All classes have 70,000 patterns for training and 2,500
5Quick, Draw! details are available at https://github.com/googlecreativelab/
quickdraw-dataset
39
SMNIST LSTM MLP
EWC λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000), λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000),
hs=(128, 256) nl=(1,2) hs=128
MAS λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000), λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100),
hs=(128, 256) lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), nl=1,
hs=128
GEM pps=(64, 128, 256), pps=(64, 128, 256),
γ=(0.5, 1), lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), γ=(0.5, 1), lr=(1e-1, 1e-2,
hs=128 1e-3), hs=128, nl=1
A-GEM pps=(128, 256, 512), pps=(128, 256, 512),
ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-2, ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-1,
1e-3), hs=128 1e-2, 1e-3), hs=512, nl=1
LwF α=([0, 1/2, 2*(2/3), α=([0, 1/2, 2*(2/3),
3*(3/4), 4*(4/5)], 1), 3*(3/4), 4*(4/5)], 1),
hs=(256,512), T=(0.5, 1, nl=(1,2), hs=256, T=(0.5,
1.5, 2), opt=(sgd, adam), 1, 1.5, 2), opt=(sgd,
lr=(1e-3, 1e-4), adam), mbs=(64, 128),
mbs=(64,128) lr=(1e-2, 1e-3)
Replay lr=(1e-3, 1e-4), hs=(128, hs=128, nl=(1,2)
256)
Naive hs=128, mbs=(32,64), hs=(128,256), nl=1
lr=(1e-3, 1e-4)
Joint Training hs=512, mbs=128, hs=128, nl=(1,2)
lr=(1e-3, 1e-4)
TableA.8: HyperparameterselectiononSMNIST.Gridsearchhasbeenperformedforallthe
combinationsinparenthesis. Boldnotationindicatesbesthyperparametervalue. Seethetext
inAppendix Aforexplanationoftheabbreviationsusedinthistable.
for test. Table B.12 summarizes the classes used in the experiments.
Appendix C. Additional Results
We provide a set of paired plots showing the relationship between the train-
ing accuracy at the end of each step and the final test accuracy at the end of
trainingonallsteps. Theseplotsareusefultocomparetherelativeperformance
of different CL strategies and different architectures.
TableC.13showsthemeanACCanditsstandarddeviationfordifferentCL
strategieswithmulti-headmodelsinMT+NCscenarios. A-GEMconcatenatesthe
one-hot task vector to each train and test input pattern.
40
SSC LSTM MLP
EWC λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000), λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000),
hs=512 lr=(1e-2, 1e-3) nl=1,
hs=1024
MAS λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100), λ=(0.1, 1, 10, 100),
lr=(1e-3, 1e-4), hs=512, mbs=(32,64,128),
mbs=(32, 64, 128) lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), nl=1,
hs=1024
GEM pps=(256, 512), γ=(0, 0.5, pps=(256, 512), γ=(0, 0.5,
1) 1)
A-GEM pps=(64, 128, 256), pps=(64, 128, 256),
ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-1, ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-1,
1e-2, 1e-3), hs=512 1e-2, 1e-3), nl=1, hs=1024
LwF α=(0.1, 1), hs=(512, α=(0.1, 1), nl=(1,2),
1024), T=(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2), hs=1024, T=(0.5, 1, 1.5,
opt=(sgd, adam), lr=(1e-3, 2), opt=(sgd, adam),
1e-4), mbs=(64,128) mbs=(64, 128), lr=(1e-2,
1e-3)
Replay hs=(512, 1024) lr=(1e-2, 1e-3), hs=1024,
nl=(1,2)
Naive hs=(512, 1024) hs=1024, nl=(1,2,3),
lr=(1e-2, 1e-3)
Joint Training lr=(0.01, 0.001), hs=(512, hs=1024, nl=(1,2), weight
1024), layers=2, mbs=128 decay=(0, 1e-4), lr=1e-3,
mbs=128
Table A.9: Hyperparameter selection on SSC. Grid search has been performed for all the
combinationsinparenthesis. Boldnotationindicatesbesthyperparametervalue. Seethetext
inAppendix Aforexplanationoftheabbreviationsusedinthistable.
41
QD LSTM
EWC λ=(1, 10, 100)
MAS λ=(1, 10, 100)
GEM pps=(32, 64), γ=(0, 0.5), lr=(1e-2, 1e-3)
A-GEM pps=(64, 128, 256), ss=(256, 512), lr=(1e-1, 1e-2)
LwF α=(0.1, 1), hs=512, T=(0.5, 1, 1.5, 2), opt=(sgd, adam),
lr=1e-4, mbs=(64,128)
Replay hs=512, lr=(1e-3, 1e-4)
Naive hs=512, layers=(1,2), directions=(1, 2)
Joint Training hs=(256, 512), layers=(1,2), bidirectional=(true, false),
mbs=512, lr=1e-4
Table A.10: Hyperparameter selection on QD. Grid search has been performed for all the
combinationsinparenthesis. Boldnotationindicatesbesthyperparametervalue. Seethetext
inAppendix Aforexplanationoftheabbreviationsusedinthistable.
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
ewc agemgemmaslwf nai
r
v
e
e play-10
)s(emiT
LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
2000
1750
1500
1250
1000
750
500
250
0
ewc agemgemmaslwf nai
r
v
e
e play-10
(a)PermutedMNIST
)s(emiT
LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(b)SplitMNIST
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
ewc agemmas lwf naive replay-10
)s(emiT
LSTM
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
ewc agemgemmaslwf naiv
re
e play-10
(c)SSC
)s(emiT
LSTM
(d)QD
FigureA.9: AverageexecutiontimeofrecurrentmodelsfordifferentCLstrategies. OnSSC,
wedidnotincludetheGEMstrategysinceithasbeenexecutedwithadifferentframework.
Bestviewedincolor.
42
Class name patterns use Class name patterns use
bed 1356 S1 off 2244 A3
bird 1346 S1 one 1276 A4
cat 1378 S2 on 2228 A4
dog 1474 S2 right 1276 A5
down 1188 S3 seven 1411 A5
eight 1113 S3 sheila 1463 A6
five 1092 - six 1485 A6
four 2400 - stop 1485 A7
go 960 - three 1188 A7
happy 1481 - tree 1188 A8
house 2382 A1 two 902 A8
left 1485 A1 up 1187 A9
marvel 1253 A2 wow 957 A9
nine 1144 A2 yes 1244 A10
no 957 A3 zero 1306 A10
TableB.11: DetailsofSSCdatasetclasses: nameoftheclass,totalnumberofpatterns,howit
hasbeenused. Sformodelselection,Aformodelassessment,thefollowingnumberindicates
whichstepusestheclass. Dashindicatesthattheclasshasnotbeenusedinourexperiments.
Class name use Class name use
hot dog S1 octopus A4
palm tree S1 cloud A5
moon S2 bicycle A5
envelope S2 swan A6
dumbbell S3 picture frame A6
microwave S3 shorts A7
drill A1 flying saucer A7
telephone A1 basketball A8
airplane A2 harp A8
dishwasher A2 beard A9
chair A3 binoculars A9
grass A3 tiger A10
rhinoceros A4 book A10
TableB.12: DetailsofQuick,Draw! datasetclasses: nameoftheclass,howithasbeenused.
Sformodelselection,Aformodelassessment,thefollowingnumberindicateswhichstepuses
theclass.
43
SMNIST MLP LSTM-4
EWC 0.99 0.64
±0.00 ±0.16
A-GEM 0.73 0.20
±0.05 ±0.06
NAIVE 0.97 0.72
±0.02 ±0.11
SSC MLP LSTM
EWC 0.77 0.80
±0.09 ±0.06
A-GEM 0.57 0.62
±0.02 ±0.07
NAIVE 0.72 0.67
±0.10 ±0.10
QD LSTM
EWC 0.98
±0.00
A-GEM 0.56
±0.16
NAIVE 0.71
±0.09
Table C.13: Multi-head experiments showing average ACC and standard deviation. Naive
strategyalreadyrecoverslargepartoftheperformance.
44
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(a)PMNIST+naive
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(b)PMNIST+ewc
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(c)PMNIST+mas
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(d)PMNIST+lwf
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(e)PMNIST+gem
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(f)PMNIST+agem
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(g)PMNIST+replay-1
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(h)PMNIST+replay-10
45
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(i)SMNIST+naive
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
(j)SMNIST+ewc
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(k)SMNIST+mas
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
(l)SMNIST+lwf
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(m)SMNIST+gem
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
(n)SMNIST+agem
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM-ROW LSTM-4
(o)SMNIST+replay-1
CCA
random S2 S4 mean
S1 S3 S5
(p)SMNIST+replay-10
46
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
(q)SSC+naive
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(r)SSC+ewc
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
(s)SSC+mas
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(t)SSC+lwf
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
(u)SSC+gem
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(v)SSC+agem
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
MLP LSTM
(w)SSC+replay-1
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(x)SSC+replay-10
47
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
(y)QD+naive
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(z)QD+ewc
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
(aa)QD+mas
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(ab)QD+lwf
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
(ac)QD+gem
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(ad)QD+agem
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
LSTM
(ae)QD+replay-1
CCA
random S3 S6 S9
S1 S4 S7 S10
S2 S5 S8 mean
(af)QD+replay-10
FigureC.10: Pairedplotscomparingaccuracyattheendoftrainingoneachstep(leftpoint)
and accuracy after training on all steps (right point). Each column represents a different
model. Red asterisk represents mean performance across all steps. Horizontal dotted line
represents the performance of a random classifier. The more vertical the line, the larger the
forgetting. Bestviewedincolor.
48
