Data Encoding for Byzantine-Resilient Distributed Optimization∗
1 2 1
Deepesh Data , Linqi Song , and Suhas Diggavi
1
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
1{deepeshdata, suhasdiggavi}@ucla.edu
2City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2linqi.song@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract
We study distributed optimization in the presence of Byzantine adversaries, where both data and
computation are distributed among m worker machines, t of which may be corrupt. The compromised
nodes may collaboratively and arbitrarily deviate from their pre-specified programs, and a designated
(master) node iteratively computes the model/parameter vector for generalized linear models. In this
work,weprimarilyfocusontwoiterativealgorithms: ProximalGradientDescent(PGD)andCoordinate
Descent (CD). Gradient descent (GD) is a special case of these algorithms. PGD is typically used in
the data-parallel setting, where data is partitioned across different samples, whereas, CD is used in the
model-parallelism setting, where data is partitioned across the parameter space.
AtthecoreofoursolutionstoboththesealgorithmsisamethodforByzantine-resilientmatrix-vector
(MV) multiplication; and for that, we propose a method based on data encoding and error correction
over real numbers to combat adversarial attacks. We can tolerate up to t ≤ (cid:98)m−1(cid:99) corrupt worker
2
nodes, which is information-theoretically optimal. We give deterministic guarantees, and our method
does not assume any probability distribution on the data. We develop a sparse encoding scheme which
enables computationally efficient data encoding and decoding. We demonstrate a trade-off between
the corruption threshold and the resource requirements (storage, computational, and communication
complexity). As an example, for t≤ m, our scheme incurs only a constant overhead on these resources,
3
overthatrequiredbytheplaindistributedPGD/CDalgorithmswhichprovidenoadversarialprotection.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper that connects MV multiplication with CD and
designs a specific encoding matrix for MV multiplication whose structure we can leverage to make CD
secure against adversarial attacks.
Ourencodingschemeextendsefficientlyto(i)thedatastreamingmodel,inwhichdatasamplescome
in an online fashion and are encoded as they arrive, and (ii) making stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
Byzantine-resilient. Intheend,wegiveexperimentalresultstoshowtheefficacyofourproposedschemes.
1 Introduction
Map-reduce architecture [DG08] is implemented in many distributed learning tasks, where there is one
designated machine (called the master) that computes the model iteratively, based on the inputs from
the worker machines at each iteration, typically using descent techniques, like (proximal) gradient descent,
coordinate descent, stochastic gradient descent, the Newton’s method, etc. The worker nodes perform the
required computations using local data, distributed to the nodes [ZWLS10]. Several other architectures,
including having no hierarchy among the nodes have been explored [LZZ+17].
∗ThispaperwaspresentedinpartsattheIEEEAllerton2018(asaninvitedtalk)[DSD18],andISIT2019[DSD19,DD19].
1
0202
voN
4
]CD.sc[
2v46620.7091:viXra
Inseveralapplicationsofdistributedlearning,includingtheInternetofBattlefieldThings(IoBT)[A+18],
federated optimization [Kon17], the recruited worker nodes might be partially trusted with their computa-
tion. Therefore, an important question is whether we can reliably perform distributed computation, taking
advantage of partially trusted worker nodes. These Byzantine adversaries can collaborate and arbitrarily
deviate from their pre-specified programs. The problem of distributed computation with Byzantine adver-
saries has a long history [LSP82], and there has been recent interest in applying this computational model
to large-scale distributed learning [BMGS17,CWCP18,CSX17].
In this paper, we study Byzantine-tolerant distributed optimization to learn a regularized generalized
linear model (GLM) (e.g., linear/ridge regression, logistic regression, Lasso, SVM dual, constrained mini-
mization, etc.). We consider two frameworks for distributed optimization: (i) data-parallelism architecture,
wheredatapointsaredistributedacrossdifferentworkernodes,andineachiteration,theyallparallellycom-
putegradientsontheirlocaldataandmasteraggregatesthemtoupdatetheparametervectorusinggradient
descent (GD) [BT89,Bot10,DCM+12]; and (ii) model-parallelism architecture, where data points are parti-
tionedacrossfeatures,andseveralworkernodesworkinparallel,updatingdifferentsubsetsofcoordinatesof
themodel/parametervectorthroughcoordinatedescent(CD)[BKBG11,Wri15,RT16]. NotethatGDrequires
full gradients to update the parameter vector; and if full gradients are too costly to compute, we can reduce
theper-iterationcostbyusingCD,1 whichalsohasbeenshowntobeveryeffectiveforsolvinggeneralizedlin-
ear models, and is particularly widely used for sparse logistic regression, SVM, and Lasso [BKBG11]. Given
itssimplicityandeffectiveness,CDcanbechosenoverGDinsuchapplications[Nes12]. Computinggradients
in the presence of Byzantine adversaries has been recently studied [BMGS17,CSX17,CWCP18,YCRB18,
AAL18,SX19,XKG19,YCRB19,GV19,RWCP19,LXC+19,GHYR19,YLR+19,DD20b,DD20a,HKJ20], and
we discuss them in detail Section 3 where we also put our work in context. However, as far as we know,
making CD robust to Byzantine adversaries has not received much attention, and to the best of our knowl-
edge, ours is the first paper that studies CD against Byzantine attacks and provides an efficient solution for
that.
1.1 Our Contributions
We propose Byzantine-resilient distributed optimization algorithms both for PGD and CD based on data
encodinganderrorcorrection(overrealnumbers). Asmentionedabove,therehavebeenseveralpapersthat
provide different methods for gradient computation in the presence of Byzantine adversaries, however, our
proposedalgorithmdiffersfromtheminoneormoreofthefollowingaspects: (i)itdoesnotmakestatistical
assumptionsonthedataorByzantineattackpatterns;(ii)itcantolerateuptoaconstantfraction(<1/2)of
the worker nodes being Byzantine, which is information-theoretically optimal; and (iii) it enables a trade-off
(in terms of storage and computation/communication overhead at the master and the worker nodes) with
Byzantine adversary tolerance, without compromising the efficiency at the master node. We give the same
guarantees for CD also.
First we design a coding scheme for distributed matrix-vector (MV) multiplication, specifically, for op-
erating in the presence of Byzantine adversaries, and use that in both our algorithms for PGD and CD to
learn GLMs. Note that the connection of MV multiplication with gradient computation is straightforward
andhasbeenknownforsometime(see,forexample,[LLP+18,DCG16]), however,itisnotclearwhetherwe
can use MV multiplication methods for CD also. Indeed, since each CD update has a different requirement
thanthatofgradientcomputation,ageneral-purposealgorithmforMVmultiplicationmaynotbeapplicable
for CD. One distinction is that in gradient computation, we only need to encode the data to compute the
MV multiplication, whereas, in CD, in addition to data encoding, since workers update few coordinates of
differentpartsoftheparametervectorinparallel,weneedtoencodetheparametervectoraswellformaster
to be able to decode that. In this paper, we design our encoding matrix for MV multiplication in such a
way that it is sparse and has a regular structure of non-zero entries (see (11) for the encoding matrix for
any worker), which makes it applicable for CD too. This leads to efficient solutions for both PGD and CD,
1Alternatively, we can also use SGD to reduce the per-iteration cost, and we give a method for making SGD Byzantine-
resilientinSection6.1.
2
which are our main focus in this paper.
Inspired from the real-error correction (or sparse reconstruction) problem [CT05], we develop efficient
encoding/decoding procedures for MV multiplication, where we encode the data matrix and distribute it to
the m worker nodes, and to recover the MV product at the master, we reduce the decoding problem to the
sparse reconstruction or real-error correction problem [CT05]. Note that in PGD, we only need to encode
the data, whereas, in CD, we also need to encode the parameter vector, and our coding scheme should
facilitate the requirement that the update on a small fraction of the encoded parameter vector should affect
only a small fraction of the original parameter vector. This is a non-trivial requirement, and our coding
scheme for MV multiplication is designed in such a way that it supports this requirement in an efficient
manner; see Section 2.2 for a description on plain distributed CD, Section 2.5 for our approach to making
CD robust to Byzantine attacks, and Section 5 for a complete solution for Byzantine-resilient CD. In the
context of PGD/CD, for decoding, the master node processes the inputs from the worker nodes, either to
compute the true gradient in the case of PGD or to facilitate the computation at the worker nodes in the
case of CD. We take a two-round approach in each iteration of both these algorithms. Our main results are
summarized in Theorem 1 (on page 9) for PGD and Theorem 2 (on page 11) for CD, and demonstrate a
trade-off between the Byzantine resilience (in terms of the number of adversarial nodes) and the resource
requirement (storage, computational, and communication complexity). As an example, for t ≤ m, our
3
scheme incurs only a constant overhead on these resources, over that required by the plain distributed PGD
andCDalgorithmswhichprovidenoadversarialprotection. OurcodingschemescanhandlebothByzantine
attacks and missing updates (e.g., caused by delay or asynchrony of worker nodes). Our encoding process is
also efficient. Though data encoding is a one-time process, it has to be efficient to harness the advantage of
distributedcomputation. Wedesignasparseencodingprocess,basedonreal-errorcorrection,whichenables
efficient encoding, and the worker nodes encode data using the sparse structure. This allows encoding with
storageredundancy2 of 2m (whichisaconstant,even iftisaconstant(< 1)fractionofm),andaone-time
m−2t 2
total computation cost for encoding is O((1+2t)nd). Note that the time for data encoding is a factor of
(1+2t) (where t is the corruption threshold) more than the time required for plain data distribution which
is O(nd), the size of the data matrix.
We extend our encoding scheme in a couple of important ways: first, to make the stochastic gradient
descent(SGD)algorithmByzantine-resilientwithoutcompromisingmuchontheresourcerequirements; and
second, to handle streaming data efficiently, where data points arrives one by one (and we encode them
as they arrive), rather than being available at the beginning of the computation; we also give few more
applications of our method. For the streaming model, more specifically, our encoding requires the same
amount of time, irrespective of whether we encode all the data at once, or we get data points one by one
(or in batches) and we encode them as they arrive. This setting encompasses a more realistic scenario, in
whichwedesignourcodingschemewiththeinitialsetofdatapointsanddistributetheencodeddataamong
the workers. Later on, when we get some more samples, we can easily incorporate them into our existing
encoded setup. See Section 6 for details on these extensions.
1.2 Paper Organization
We present our problem formulation, description of the plain distributed PGD and CD algorithms, and the
high-level ideas of our Byzantine-resilient algorithms for both PGD and CD along-with our main results
in Section 2. We give detailed related work in Section 3. We present our full coding schemes for MV
multiplication and also for gradient computation for PGD along-with a complete analysis of their resource
requirements in Section 4. In Section 5, we provide a complete solution to CD. In Section 6, we show how
our method can be extended to SGD and to the data streaming model. We also discuss applicability of our
method to a few more important applications in that section. In Section 7, we show numerical results of our
method: we show the efficiency of our method for both gradient descent (GD) and coordinate descent (CD)
by running them to solve linear regression on two datasets (moderate and large) and plotting the running
time with varying number of corrupt worker nodes (up to <1/2 fraction).
2Storageredundancyisdefinedastheratioofthesizeoftheencodedmatrixandthesizeoftherawdatamatrix.
3
1.3 Notation
We denote vectors by bold small letters (e.g., x,y,z, etc.) and matrices by bold capital letters (e.g.,
A,F,S,X, etc.). We denote the amount of storage required by a matrix X by |X|. For any positive
integer n ∈ N, we denote the set {1,2,...,n} by [n]. For n ,n ∈ N, where n ≤ n , we write [n : n ]
1 2 1 2 1 2
to denote the set {n ,n +1,...,n }. For any vector u ∈ Rn and any set S ⊂ [n], we write u to denote
1 1 2 S
the |S|-length vector, which is the restriction of u to the coordinates in the set S. The support of a vector
u∈Rn is defined by supp(u):={i∈[n]:u (cid:54)=0}. We say that a vector u∈Rn is t-sparse if |supp(u)|≤t.
i
Whilestatingourresults,weassumethatperformingthebasicarithmeticoperations(addition,subtraction,
multiplication, and division) on real numbers takes unit time.
2 Problem Setting and Our Results
Given a dataset consisting of n labelled data points (x ,y ) ∈ Rd × R, i ∈ [n], we want to learn a
i i
model/parametervectorw∈Rd, whichisaminimizerofthefollowingempirical risk minimizationproblem:
(cid:32)(cid:18) n (cid:19) (cid:33)
1 (cid:88)
min f (w) +h(w) , (1)
w∈Rd n i
i=1
where f (w), i = 1,2,...,n, denotes the risk associated with the i’th data point with respect to w and
i
h(w) denotes a regularizer. We call f(w) := 1 (cid:80)n f (w) the average empirical risk associated with the
n i=1 i
n data points with respect to w. Our main focus in this paper is on generalized linear models (GLM),
where f (w)=(cid:96)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ) for some differentiable loss function (cid:96). Here, each f :Rd →R is differentiable,
i i i i
h:Rd →Risconvexbutnotnecessarilydifferentiable,and(cid:104)x ,w(cid:105)isthedotproductofx andw. Wedonot
i i
necessarily need each f to be convex, but we require f(w) to be a convex function. Note that f(w)+h(w)
i
is a convex function. In the following we study different algorithms for solving (1) to learn a GLM.
2.1 Proximal Gradient Descent
Wecansolve(1)usingProximal Gradient Descent(PGD).Thisisaniterativealgorithm,inwhichwechoose
an arbitrary/random initial w ∈ Rd, and then update the parameter vector according to the following
0
update rule:
w =prox (w −α ∇f(w )), t=1,2,3,... (2)
t+1 h,αt t t t
where α is the step size or the learning rate at the t’th iteration, determining the convergence behaviour.
t
There are standard choices for it; see, for example, [BV04, Chapter 9]. For any h and α, the proximal
operator prox :Rd →R is defined as
h,α
1
prox (w)=argmin (cid:107)z−w(cid:107)2+h(z). (3)
h,α z∈Rd 2α 2
Observe that if h = 0, then prox (w) = w for every w ∈ Rd, and PGD reduces to the classical gradient
h,α
descent(GD).Thisencompassesseveralimportantoptimizationproblemsrelatedtolearning,forwhichprox
operator has a closed form expression; some of these problems are given below.
• Lasso. Here f (w)= 1((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105)−y )2 and h(w)=λ(cid:107)w(cid:107) . It turns out that prox (z) for Lasso is equal
i 2 i i 1 h,α
to the soft-thresholding operator S (z) [Tib15], which, for j ∈[d], is defined as
λα

z +λα if z <−λα,
 j j
(S (z)) = 0 if −λα≤z ≤λα,
λα j j
z
−λα if z >λα.
j j
4
• SVMdual. Jaggi[Jag13]showedanequivalencebetweenthedualformulationofSupportVectorMachines
(SVM) and Lasso. Hence, SVM dual is also a special case of (1).
• Constrained optimization. Wewanttosolveaconstrainedminimizationproblemmin f(w),where
w∈C
C ⊆Rd is a closed, convex set. Define an indicator function I for C as follows: I (w):=0, if w∈C; and
C C
I (w):=∞, otherwise. Now, observe the following equivalence
C
minf(w) ⇐⇒ min f(w)+I (w).
C
w∈C w∈Rd
If we solve the RHS using PGD, then it can be easily verified that the corresponding proximal operator
is equal to the projection operator onto the set C [Tib15]. So, the proximal gradient update step is to
compute the usual gradient and then project it back onto the set C.
• Logistic regression. Here f is the logistic function, defined as
i
(cid:18) 1 (cid:19) (cid:18) e−ui (cid:19)
f (w)=−y log −(1−y )log ,
i i 1+e−ui i 1+e−ui
where u =(cid:104)x ,w(cid:105), and h=0. As noted earlier, since h=0, PGD reduces to GD for logistic regression.
i i
• Ridge regression. Heref (w)= 1((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105)−y )2 andh(w)= λ(cid:107)w(cid:107)2. Sincef ’sandharedifferentiable,
i 2 i i 2 2 i
we can alternatively solve this simply using GD.
Let X∈Rn×d denote the data matrix, whose i’th row is equal to the i’th data point x . For simplicity,
i
assume that m divides n, and let X denote the n ×d matrix, whose j’th row is equal to x . In
a distributed setup, all the data is d i istributed am m ong m worker machines (worker i has X ) (i− an 1) dm n m +j aster
i
updates the parameter vector using the update rule (2). At the t’th iteration, master sends w to all the
t
workers; worker i computes the gradient (denoted by ∇ f(w )) on its local data and sends it to the master;
i t
master aggregates all the received m local gradients to obtain the global gradient
m
1 (cid:88)
∇f(w )= ∇ f(w ). (4)
t m i t
i=1
Now, master updates the parameter vector according to (2) and obtains w . Repeat the process until
t+1
convergence.
If full gradients are too costly to compute. Updating the parameter vector in each iteration of PGD
accordingto(2)requirescomputingfullgradients. Thismaybeprohibitiveinlarge-scaleapplications,where
each machine in a distributed framework has a lot of data, and computing full gradients at local machines
maybetooexpensiveandbecomesthebottleneck. Insuchscenarios,therearetwoalternativestoreducethis
per-iterationcost: (i)CoordinateDescent(CD),inwhichwepickafewcoordinates(atrandom),computethe
partial gradient along those, and descent along those coordinates only, and (ii) Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), in which we sample a data point at random, compute the gradient on that point, and descent along
that direction. These are discussed in Section 2.2 and Section 6.1, respectively.
2.2 Coordinate Descent
For the clear exposition of ideas, we focus on the non-regularized empirical risk minimization from (1) (i.e.,
taking h = 0) for learning a generalized linear model (GLM). This can be generalized to objectives with
(non-)differentiable regularizers [BKBG11,ST11]. Let X ∈ Rn×d denote the data matrix and y ∈ Rn the
corresponding label vector. To make it distinct from the last section, we denote the objective function by φ
and write it as φ(Xw;y) to emphasize that we want to learn a GLM, where the objective function depends
5
on the data points only through their inner products with the parameter vector. Formally, we want to
optimize3
(cid:32) n (cid:33)
(cid:88)
min φ(Xw;y):= (cid:96)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ) . (5)
i i
w∈Rd
i=1
ForU ⊆[d],wewrite∇ φ(Xw;y)todenotethegradientofφ(Xw;y)withrespecttow ,wherew denotes
U U U
the|U|-lengthvectorobtainedbyrestrictingw tothecoordinatesinU. Tomakethenotationlesscluttered,
let φ(cid:48)(Xw;y) denote the n-length vector, whose i’th entry is equal to (cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ) := ∂ (cid:96)(u;y )| .
i i ∂u i u=(cid:104)xi,w(cid:105)
Notethat∇φ(Xw;y)=XTφ(cid:48)(Xw;y)andthat∇ φ(Xw;y)=XTφ(cid:48)(Xw;y),whereX denotesthen×|U|
U U U
matrix obtained by restricting the column indices of X to the elements in U.
Coordinatedescent(CD)isaniterativealgorithm,where,ineachiteration,wechooseasetofcoordinates
and update only those coordinates (while keeping the other coordinates fixed). In distributed CD, we take
advantage of the parallel architecture to improve the running time of (centralized) CD. In the distributed
setting, we divide the data matrix vertically into m parts and store the i’th part at the i’th worker node.
Concretely, assume, forsimplicity, thatmdividesd. LetX=[X X ... X ]andw=[wT wT ... wT]T,
1 2 m 1 2 m
where each X is an n× d matrix and each w is a length d vector. Each worker i stores X and is
i m i m i
responsible for updating (a few coordinates of) w – hence the terminology, model-parallelism. We store the
i
label vector y at the master node. In coordinate descent, since we update only a few coordinates in each
round, there are a few options on how to update these coordinates in a distributed manner:
Subset of workers: Master picks a subset S ⊂[m] of workers and asks them to update their w ’s [RT16].
i
Thismaynotbegoodintheadversarialsetting, becauseifonlyasmallsubsetofworkersareupdatingtheir
parameters, the adversary can corrupt those workers and disrupt the computation.
Subset of coordinates for all workers: All the worker nodes update only a subset of the coordinates
of their local parameter vector w ’s. Master can (deterministically or randomly) pick a subset U (which
i
may or may not be different for all workers) of f ≤ d/m coordinates and asks each worker to updates only
thosecoordinates. IfmasterpicksU deterministically, itcancyclethroughandupdateallcoordinatesofthe
parameter vector in (cid:100)d/mf(cid:101) iterations.
In Algorithm 1, we give the distributed CD algorithm with the second approach, where all worker
nodes update the coordinates of their local parameter vectors for a single subset U. We will adopt this
approach in our method to make the distributed CD Byzantine-resilient. Let r = d. For any i ∈ [m], let
m
w = [w w ...w ]T and X = [X X ...X ], where X is the j’th column of X . For any i ∈ [m]
i i1 i2 ir i i1 i2 ir ij i
and U ⊆ [r], let w denote the |U|-length vector that is obtained from w by restricting its entries to the
iU i
coordinates in U; similarly, let X denote the n×|U| matrix obtained by restricting the column indices of
iU
X to the elements in U.
i
In Algorithm 1, for each worker i to update w according to (6), where the partial gradient of φ with
i
respect to w is equal to ∇ φ(Xw;y) = XT φ(cid:48)( (cid:80)m X w ;y) and worker i has only (X ,w ), every
iU iU iU j=1 j j i i
other worker j sends X w to the master, who computes φ(cid:48)( (cid:80)m X w ;y)5 and sends it back to all the
j j j=1 j j
workers. Observe that, even if one worker is corrupt, it can send an adversarially chosen vector to make
the computationat themaster deviatearbitrarily fromthe desired computation, whichmayadversely affect
the update at all the worker nodes subsequently.6 Similarly, corrupt workers can send adversarially chosen
information to affect the stopping criterion.
3Herewearenotoptimizingtheaverageoflossfunctions–sincenisafixednumber,thisdoesnotaffectthesolutionspace.
4Afterthe1stiteration,workerineednotmultiplyXi withwi toobtainXiwi ineveryiteration;asonlyafewcoordinates
ofwi areupdated,itonlyneedstomultiplythosecolumnsofXi thatcorrespondstotheupdatedcoordinatesofwi.
5Note that even after computing Xw, master needs access to the labels yi,i = 1,2,...,n to compute φ(cid:48)(Xw;y). Since
y∈Rn isjustavector,wecaneitherstorethatatmaster,or,alternatively,wecanencodeydistributedlyattheworkersand
mastercanrecoverthatusingthemethoddevelopedinSection4forByzantine-resilientdistributedmatrix-vectormultiplication,
wherethematrixisanidentitymatrixandvectorisequaltoy.
6Specifically,supposethei’thworkeriscorruptandtheadversarywantsmastertocomputeφ(cid:48)(Xw+e;y)foranyarbitrary
vectore∈Rn ofitschoice,thenthei’thworkercansendXiwi+etothemaster.
6
Algorithm 1 Distributed Coordinate Descent
1: Initialize. Each worker i ∈ [m] starts with an arbitrary/random w i ∈ Rr, where r = m d and, for
simplicity, we assume that m divides d.
2: while (until the stopping criteria at master is not satisfied) do
3: On each worker i∈[m], do in parallel:
4: Worker i computes X i w i and sends it to the master node.4
5: Worker i receives (U ⊆[r],φ(cid:48)(Xw;y)) from the master node.
6: Worker i updates its local parameter vector as (where ∇ iU φ(Xw;y)=XT iU φ(cid:48)(Xw;y))
w ←w −α∇ φ(Xw;y) (6)
iU iU iU
while keeping the other coordinates of w unchanged, and sends the updated w to the master.
i i
7: At Master:
8: Master receives {X i w i } i∈[m] from the m workers.
9: Master first computes Xw= (cid:80)m i=1 X i w i and then computes φ(cid:48)(Xw;y).
10: Master picks U ⊆[r] (where U can be picked either randomly or in a round-robin fashion) and sends
(U ⊆[r],φ(cid:48)(Xw;y)) to all workers.
11: end while
2.3 Adversary Model
We want to perform the distributed computation described in Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 under adversarial
attacks, where the corrupt nodes may provide erroneous vectors to the master node. Our adversarial model
is described next.
In our adversarial model, the adversary can corrupt at most t< m worker nodes7, and the compromised
2
nodes may collaborate and arbitrarily deviate from their pre-specified programs. If a worker is corrupt,
then instead of sending the true vector, it may send an arbitrary vector to disrupt the computation. We
refer to the corrupt nodes as erroneous or under the Byzantine attack. We can also handle asynchronous
updates, by dropping the straggling nodes beyond a specified delay, and still compute the correct gradient
due to encoding. Therefore we treat updates from these nodes as being “erased”. We refer to these as
erasures/stragglers. For every worker i that sends a message to the master, we can assume, without loss of
generality,thatthemasterreceivesu +e ,whereu isthetruevectorande istheerrorvector,wheree =0
i i i i i
if the i’th node is honest, otherwise can be arbitrary. We assume that at most t nodes can be adversarially
corrupt and at most s nodes can be stragglers, where s and t are some constants less than 1 that we will
2
decide later. Note that the master node does not know which t worker nodes are corrupted (which makes
this problem non-trivial to solve), but knows t. We propose a method that mitigates the effects of both of
these anomalies.
Remark 1. A well-studied problem is that of asynchronous distributed optimization, where the workers can
have different delays in updates [DB13]. One mechanism to deal with this is to wait for a subset of responses,
before proceeding to the next iteration, treating the others as missing (or erasures) [KSDY17]. Byzantine
attacks are quite distinct from such erasures, as the adversary can report wrong local gradients, requiring
the master node to create mechanisms to overcome such attacks. If the master node simply aggregates the
collected updates as in (4), the computed gradient could be arbitrarily far away from the true one, even with
a single adversary [MGR18].
7Our results also apply to a slightly different adversarial model, where the adversary can adaptively choose which of the
t worker nodes to attack at each iteration. However, in this model, the adversary cannot modify the local stored data of the
attackednode,asotherwise,overtime,itcancorruptallthedata,makinganydefenseimpossible.
7
2.4 Our Approach to Gradient Computation
Recall that f (w)=(cid:96)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ) for some differentiable loss function (cid:96), and the gradient of f at w is equal
i i i i
to ∇f (w) = (x )T(cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ), where (cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ) := ∂ (cid:96)(u;y )| . Note that ∇f (w) ∈ Rd is a
i i i i i i ∂u i u=(cid:104)xi,w(cid:105) i
column vector. Let f(cid:48)(w) denote the n-length vector whose i’th entry is equal to (cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ). With this
i i
notation, since f(w) = 1 (cid:80)n f (w), we have ∇f(w) = 1XTf(cid:48)(w). Since n is a constant, it is enough to
n i=1 i n
compute XTf(cid:48)(w). So, for simplicity, in the rest of the paper we write
∇f(w)=XTf(cid:48)(w), ∀w∈Rd. (7)
A natural approach to computing the gradient ∇f(w) is to compute it in two rounds: (i) compute
f(cid:48)(w) in the 1st round by first multiplying X with w and then master locally computes f(cid:48)(w) from Xw
(master can do this locally, because Xw is an n-dimensional vector whose i’th entry is equal to (cid:104)x ,w(cid:105) and
i
(f(cid:48)(w)) = (cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105);y ));8 and then (ii) compute ∇f(w) = XTf(cid:48)(w) in the 2nd round by multiplying XT
i i i
with f(cid:48)(w). So, the task of each gradient computation reduces to two matrix-vector (MV) multiplications,
where the matrices are fixed and vectors may be different each time. To combat against the adversarial
worker nodes, we do both of these MV multiplications using data encoding and real-error correction; see
Figure 1 on page 17 for a pictorial description of our approach.
Atwo-roundapproachforgradientcomputationhasbeenproposedforstragglermitigationin[LLP+18],
but our method for MV multiplication differs from that fundamentally, as we have to provide adversarial
protection. Notethatinthecaseofstragglers/erasuresweknowwhothestragglingnodesare,butthisinfor-
mation is not known in the case of adversarial nodes, and master needs to decode without this information
in the context of Byzantine adversaries. This is slightly different from the standard error correcting codes
(over finite fields) as the matrix entries in machine learning applications are from reals. In this case, we use
ideas from real-error correction (or sparse reconstruction) from the compressive sensing literature [CT05],
and using which we develop an efficient decoding at master, which also gives rise to our sparse encoding
matrix; see Section 4 for more details. For decoding efficiently, we crucially leverage the block error pattern
and design a decoding method at master, which, interestingly, requires just one application of the sparse
recovery method on a vector of size m, the number of workers, which may be much smaller than the data
dimensions n and d, thereby making the decoding computationally efficient. Our encoding matrix (given in
(11),designedforMVmultiplication)isverysparseandhasaregularpatternofnon-zeroentries,whichalso
makes it applicable for making coordinate-descent (CD) Byzantine-resilient. We emphasize that a general-
purpose code for MV multiplication may not be applicable for CD, as each CD iteration requires updating
only a few coordinates of the parameter vector, which makes it fundamentally different (and arguably more
complicated to robustify) than GD iterations; see Section 3.2 and Section 5 for more details. Since iterative
algorithms (such as GD and CD) require repeated parameter updates, it is crucial to have a method that
has low computational complexity, both at the worker nodes as well as at the master node, and our coding
solutions for both GD and CD achieve that, in addition to being highly storage efficient; see Theorem 1 for
GD and Theorem 2 for CD.
Coming back to our two-round approach for gradient computations using MV multiplications, for the
1st round, we encode X using a sparse encoding matrix S(1) = [(S(1))T,...,(S(1))T]T and store S(1)X
1 m i
at the i’th worker node; and for the 2nd round, we encode XT using another sparse encoding matrix
S(2) = [(S(2))T,...,(S(2))T]T, and store S(2)XT at the i’th worker node. Now, in the 1st round of the
1 m i
gradient computation at w, the master node broadcasts w and the i’th worker node replies with S(1)Xw
i
(a corrupt worker may report an arbitrary vector); upon receiving all the vectors, the master node applies
error-correction procedure to recover Xw and then locally computes f(cid:48)(w) as described above. In the 2nd
round,themasternodebroadcastsf(cid:48)(w)andsimilarlycanrecoverXTf(cid:48)(w)(whichisequaltothegradient)
attheendofthe2ndround. So,itsufficestodeviseamethodformultiplyingavectorv toafixedmatrixA
in a distributed and adversarial setting. Since this is a linear operation, we can apply error correcting codes
over real numbers to perform this task. We describe it briefly below.
8NotethatevenaftercomputingXw,masterneedsaccesstothelabelsyi,i=1,2,...,ntocomputef(cid:48)(w). SeeFootnote5
foradiscussiononhowmastercangetaccesstothelabels.
8
A trivial approach. Take a generator matrix G of any real-error correcting linear code. Encode A as
ATG =: B. Divide the columns of B into m groups as B = [B B ...B ], where worker i stores B .
1 2 m i
Master broadcasts v and each worker i responds with v B +eT, where e =0 if the i’th worker is honest,
T i i i
otherwise can be arbitrary. Note that at most t of the e ’s can be non-zero. Responses from the workers
i
can be combined as vTB+eT. Since every row of B is a codeword, vTB = vTATG is also a codeword.
Therefore, one can take any off-the-shelf decoding algorithm for the code whose generator matrix is G and
obtainvTAT. Forexample, wecanusetheReed-Solomoncodes(overrealnumbers)forthispurpose, which
only incurs a constant storage overhead and tolerates optimal number of corruptions (up to < 1). Note
2
that we need fast decoding, as it is performed in every iteration of the gradient computation by the master.
As far as we know, any off-the-shelf decoding algorithm “over real numbers” requires at least a quadratic
computational complexity, which leads to Ω(n2+d2) decoding complexity per gradient computation, which
could be impractical.
Thetrivialschemedoesnotexploittheblockerrorpatternwhichwecruciallyexploitinourcodingscheme
to give a ∼O((n+d)m) time decoding per gradient computation, which could be a significant improvement
over the trivial scheme, since m typically is much smaller than n and d for large-scale problems. In fact,
our coding scheme enables a trade-off (in terms of storage and computation/communicationoverhead at the
masterandtheworkernodes)withByzantineadversarytolerance,withoutcompromisingtheefficiencyatthe
master node. We also want encoding to be efficient (otherwise it defeats the purpose of data encoding) and
our sparse encoding matrix achieves that. Our main result for the Byzantine-resilient distributed gradient
computation is as follows, which is proved in Section 4:
Theorem 1 (GradientComputation). LetX∈Rn×d denotethedatamatrix. Letmdenotethetotalnumber
of worker nodes. We can compute the gradient exactly in a distributed manner in the presence of t corrupt
worker nodes and s stragglers, with the following guarantees, where (cid:15)>0 is a free parameter.
(cid:106) (cid:107)
• (s+t)≤ (cid:15) · m .
1+(cid:15) 2
• Total storage requirement is roughly 2(1+(cid:15))|X|.
• Computational complexity for each gradient computation:
– at each worker node is O((1+(cid:15))nd).
m
– at the master node is O((1+(cid:15))(n+d)m).
• Communication complexity for each gradient computation:
– each worker sends
(cid:0) (1+(cid:15))n+d(cid:1)
real numbers.
m
– master broadcasts (n+d) real numbers.
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
• Total encoding time is O nd (cid:15) m+1 .
1+(cid:15)
(cid:106) (cid:107)
Remark 2. The statement of Theorem 1 allows for any s and t as long as (s+t)≤ (cid:15) · m . As we are
1+(cid:15) 2
handling both erasures and errors in the same way9 the corruption threshold does not have to handle s and
t separately. To simplify the discussion, for the rest of the paper, we consider only Byzantine corruption,
and denote the corrupted set by I ⊂ [m] with |I| ≤ t, with the understanding that this can also work with
stragglers.
In Theorem 1, (cid:15) is a design choice and a free parameter that can take any value in the interval [0,m−1],
where (cid:15) = 0 implies no corruption and (cid:15) = m−1 implies that corruption threshold t can be anything up to
m−1. If we want to tolerate t corrupt workers, then (cid:15) must satisfy (cid:15)≥ 2t .10
2 m−2t
9When there are only stragglers, one can design an encoding scheme where both the master and the worker nodes oper-
ate oblivious to encoding, while solving a slightly altered optimization problem [KSDY17], in which gradients are computed
approximately,leadingtomoreefficientstraggler-tolerantGD.
10Wecouldhavewritteneverythingintermsoft,m,n,d,butwechosetointroduceanothervariable(cid:15)which,inouropinion,
clearlybringsoutthetradeoffbetweenthecorruptionthresholdandtheresourcerequirementswithoutclutteringtheexpressions.
9
Remark 3 (Comparison with the plain distributed PGD). We compare the resource requirements of our
method with the plain distributed PGD (which provides no adversarial protection), where all the data points
are evenly distributed among the m workers. In each iteration, master sends the parameter vector w to all
the workers; upon receiving w, all workers compute the gradients on their local data in O(nd) time (per
m
worker) and send them to the master; master aggregates them in O(md) time to obtain the global gradient
and then updates the parameter vector using (2).
In our scheme (i) the total storage requirement is O(1+(cid:15)) factor more;11 (see also Remark 4) (ii) the
amount of computation at each worker node is O(1+(cid:15)) factor more; (iii) the amount of computation at the
master node is O((1+(cid:15))(1+ n)) factor more, which is comparable in cases where n is not much bigger than
d
d; (iv) master broadcasts (1+ n) factor more data, which is comparable if n is not much bigger than d; and
d
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(v) each worker sends O (1+(cid:15))1+n/d factor more data, which is O(1+(cid:15)) – a constant factor – as long as
m
n=O(dm).
Remark 4. Let m be an even number. Note that we can get the corruption threshold t to be any number less
than m/2, but at the expense of increased storage and computation. For any δ >0, if we want to get δ close
to m/2, i.e., t=m/2−δ, then we must have (1+(cid:15))≥m/2δ. In particular, at (cid:15)=2, we can tolerate up to
m/3 corrupt nodes, with constant overhead in the total storage as well as on the computational complexity.
Note that when δ is a constant, i.e., t is close to m−1, then (cid:15) grows linearly with m; for example,
2
if t = m−1, then (cid:15) = m−1. In this case, our storage redundancy factor is O(m). In contrast, the trivial
2
scheme(see “trivialapproach” onpage 9)doesbetter inthisregime andhasonly aconstant storage overhead,
butattheexpenseofanincreaseddecodingcomplexityatthemaster,whichisatleastquadraticintheproblem
dimensions d and n, whereas, our decoding complexity at the master always scales linearly with d and n. If
we always want a constant storage redundancy for all values of the corruption threshold t, we can use our
coding scheme if t≤c· m−1, where c<1 is a constant, and use the trivial scheme if t is close to m−1.
2 2
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
OurencodingisalsoefficientandrequiresO nd (cid:15) m+1 time. NotethatO(nd)isequaltothetime
1+(cid:15)
required for distributing the data matrix X among m workers (for running the distributed gradient descent
algorithms without the adversary); and the encoding time in our scheme (which results in an encoded matrix
that provides Byzantine-resiliency) is a factor of (2t+1) more.
Remark 5. Our scheme is not only efficient (both in terms of computational complexity and storage re-
quirement), but it can also tolerate up to (cid:98)m−1(cid:99) corrupt worker nodes (by taking (cid:15)=m−1 in Theorem 1).
2
It is not hard to prove that this bound is information-theoretically optimal, i.e., no algorithm can tolerate
(cid:100)m(cid:101) corrupt worker nodes, and at the same time correctly computes the gradient.
2
2.5 Our Approach to Coordinate Descent
We use data encoding and add redundancy to enlarge the parameter space. Specifically, we encode the data
matrixXusinganencodingmatrixR=[R R ... R ],whereeachR isad×pmatrix(withpm≥d),and
1 2 m i
storeXR
i
atthei’thworker. DefineX(cid:101)R :=XR. Now, insteadofsolving (5), wesolvetheencodedproblem
argmin v∈Rpm φ(X(cid:101)Rv;y) using Algorithm 1 (together with decoding at the master); see Figure 2 on page 25
for a pictorial description of our algorithm. We design the encoding matrix R such that at every iteration
of our algorithm, updating any (small) subset of coordinates of v ’s (let v=[vT vT ... vT]) automatically
i 1 2 m
updates some (small) subset of coordinates of w; and, furthermore, by updating those coordinates of v ’s,
i
we can efficiently recover the correspondingly updated coordinates of w, despite the errors injected by the
adversary. In fact, at any iteration t, the encoded parameter vector v and the original parameter vector w
t t
satisfies v = R+w , where R+ := RT(RRT)−1 is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of R, and w evolves
t t t
in the same way as if we are running Algorithm 1 on the original problem.
11For example, by taking (cid:15)=2, our method can tolerate m/3 corrupt worker nodes. So, we can tolerate linear corruption
withaconstantoverheadintheresourcerequirement,comparedtotheplaindistributedgradientcomputationwhichdoesnot
provideanyadversarialprotection.
10
We will be effectively updating the coordinates of the parameter vector w in chunks of size (m−2t) or
its integer multiples (where t is the number of corrupt workers). In particular, if each worker i updates k
coordinates of v , then k(m−2t) coordinates of w will get updated. For comparison, Algorithm 1 updates
i
km coordinates of the parameter vector w in each iteration, if each worker updates k coordinates in that
iteration.
As described in Algorithm 1 for the Byzantine-free CD, in order to update its local parameter vector w
i
according to (6), worker i needs access to φ(cid:48)(Xw;y), which master computes after receiving {X w }
j j j∈[m]
fromtheworkers. InourByzantine-resilientalgorithmforCDalsomasterwillneedtocomputeXwinevery
CD iteration, and for this purpose, we employ the same encoding-decoding procedure for MV multiplication
that we used in the first round of gradient computation, as described in Section 2.4. In particular, to make
the notation distinct from gradient computation, in order to compute Xw, we encode X using an encoding
matrixL=[LT
1
LT
2
... LT
m
]T,whereeachL
i
isap(cid:48)×nmatrix(withp(cid:48)m≥n)andworkeristoresX(cid:101)L
i
=L
i
X.
NotethatinordertocomputeXw,inthefirstroundofgradientcomputationasdescribedinSection2.4,
masterbroadcastswtoalltheworkersandeachworkericomputesX(cid:101)Lwandsendsitthethemaster(corrupt
i
workers may report arbitrary vectors), who then decodes and obtains Xw. However, in coordinate descent,
though master wants to compute Xw in each CD iteration, we can significantly improve the computation
required at each worker: since only a few coordinates of the original parameter vector w are updated in
each CD iteration, master needs to send only those updated coordinates, and workers need to preform MV
multiplication with a much smaller matrix, whose number of columns is equal to the number of updated
coordinates of w that they receive from master. Thus, the computational complexity in each CD iteration
at worker is proportional to the number of coordinates updated in each CD iteration, as desired.
OurmainresultfortheByzantine-resilientdistributedcoordinatedescentisstatedbelow,whichisproved
in Section 5.
Theorem 2 (Coordinate Descent). Under the setting of Theorem 1, our Byzantine-resilient distributed CD
algorithm has the following guarantees, where (cid:15)>0 is a free parameter.
(cid:106) (cid:107)
• (s+t)≤ (cid:15) · m .
1+(cid:15) 2
• Total storage requirement is roughly 2(1+(cid:15))|X|.
• If each worker i updates τ coordinates of v , then
i
– τm coordinates of the corresponding w gets updated.
1+(cid:15)
– the computational complexity in each iteration
∗ at each worker node is O(nτ).
∗ at the master node is O((1+(cid:15))nm+τm2).
– the communication complexity in each iteration
∗ each worker sends (cid:0) τ +(1+(cid:15))n(cid:1) real numbers.
m
(cid:16) (cid:17)
∗ master broadcasts τm +n real numbers.
1+(cid:15)
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
• Total encoding time is O nd (cid:15) m+1 .
1+(cid:15)
Remark 6 (Comparison with the plain distributed CD). We compare the resource requirements of our
method with the plain distributed CD described in Algorithm 1 that does not provide any adversarial protec-
tion. Let (cid:15) be any number in the interval [0,m−1] – for illustration, we can take (cid:15)=2, which means t≤ m
3
workers are corrupt. In Algorithm 1, if each worker i updates τ coordinates of w (in total τm coordinates
1+(cid:15) i 1+(cid:15)
of w) in each iteration, then (i) each worker requires O( nτ ) time to multiply X with the updated part of
1+(cid:15) i
w ; (ii) master requires O(nm) time to compute
(cid:80)m
X w from {X w } ; (iii) each worker sends n real
i i=1 i i i i i∈[m]
numbers (required for X w ) to master; and (iv) master broadcasts n real numbers (required for φ(cid:48)(Xw;y)).
i i
11
In our scheme (i) the total storage requirement is O(1+(cid:15)) factor more; (ii) the amount of computation at
eachworkernodeisO(1+(cid:15))factormore; (iii)theamountofcomputationatthemasternodeisO((1+(cid:15))+τm)
n
factor more – typically, since τ is a constant and number of workers is much less than n, this again could be
(cid:16) (cid:17)
O(1+(cid:15)); (iv) master broadcasts 1+ τm factor more data, which could be a constant if τm is smaller
(1+(cid:15))n
(cid:16) (cid:17)
than (1+(cid:15))n; and (v) each worker sends τ + (1+(cid:15)) factor more data, where the 1st term is much smaller
n nm
than 1 as τ is typically a constant, and the 2nd term is close to zero as (1+(cid:15)) is always upper-bounded by
m.
Remark7(Comparisonwiththereplication-basedstrategy). OnesimplewaytomakeAlgorithm1Byzantine-
resilient is using repetition code, where we first divide the set of m workers into m groups of size (2t+1)
2t+1
each and also divide the data matrix as X=[X 1 X 2 ... X m ] (assume, for simplicity, that (2t+1) divides
2t+1
m). Now, store the i’th block X at the (2t+1) workers in the i’th group of workers. Let the parameter
i
vector be divided as w = [wT wT ... wT ]T. In each CD iteration, the local parameter updates in any
1 2 m
2t+1
w is replicated at (2t+1) different workers in the i’th group of workers, and since at most t workers are
i
corrupt, master can do a majority vote for decoding. Note that the total storage and the computation at
workers in this scheme grow linearly by a factor of (2t+1), where t is the number of corruption, which could
be significant. In contrast, the method that we propose can tolerate linear corruption, say, t = m, with a
3
constant overhead in storage and computational complexity.
The Remarks 2, 4, 5 are also applicable for Theorem 2.
3 Related Work
There has been a significant recent interest in using coding-theoretic techniques to mitigate the well-known
straggler problem [DB13], including gradient coding [TLDK17,RTDT18,CP18,HRSH18], encoding compu-
tation [LLP+18,DCG16,DCG19], and data encoding [KSDY17,KSDY19]. However, one cannot directly
apply the methods for straggler mitigation to the Byzantine attacks case, as we do not know which up-
dates are under attack. Distributed computing with Byzantine adversaries is a richly investigated topic
since [LSP82], and has received recent attention in the context of large-scale distributed optimization and
learning [BMGS17,CSX17,CWCP18,YCRB18,AAL18,SX19,XKG19,YCRB19,GV19,RWCP19,LXC+19,
GHYR19,YLR+19,DD20b,DD20a,HKJ20]. These can be divided into three categories: (i) One which
assume explicit statistical models for data across workers (e.g., data drawn i.i.d. from a probability distri-
bution) and analyze gradient descent [CSX17,YCRB18,SX19,YCRB19,GHYR19]. (ii) Other set of works
make no probabilistic assumption on data, and optimize through stochastic methods (e.g., stochastic gra-
dient descent) [BMGS17,AAL18,GV19,XKG19,LXC+19,RWCP19,DD20a,DD20b,HKJ20] and also with
deterministic methods (e.g., gradient descent) [DD20a,DD20b]. Note that none of these two sets of works
do data encoding and work with data as it is, and provide Byzantine resilience by applying some robust
aggregation procedures (e.g., geometric median, coordinate-wise median, outlier-filtering, etc.) at the mas-
ter for aggregating gradients. (iii) Another line of work which is most relevant to ours provide Byzantine
resiliency using redundant computations, either by encoding the gradients [CWCP18] or by encoding the
data itself [YLR+19]. Note that [RWCP19] combines both redundant computations and do a hierarchical
robust aggregation and not is directly comparable to ours.
Note that the statistical nature of data/analysis in the first two sets of works leads to a statistical
approximationerrorintheconvergencerates,whichisalsointensifiedbytheinaccuracyoftherobustgradient
aggregation procedure. One of the main focuses in these works is typically on obtaining faster convergence
(where the goal is to match the convergence rate of plain SGD/GD) and as good an approximation error
√
as possible. Note that the approximation error in all these works scales at least as Ω( d), where d is the
dimension of the model parameter vector, which may be significant in high-dimensional settings. Moreover,
in all these works, since we are not allowed to pre-process the data (such as, doing data encoding, etc.), we
need to make some assumptions on the data, and furthermore, master has to apply a non-trivial decoding
12
for gradient aggregation, which requires significantly more time than what our decoding requires. For
example, filtering-based decoding [SX19,DD20a,DD20b], median-based decoding [CSX17,YCRB18], and
heuristicapproaches[BMGS17], allhaveasuper-linearcomplexityinm–infact,thefiltering-basedmethod
as in [SX19,DD20a,DD20b] (which is the most effective in terms of the approximation error) requires
O(m3d) time. In contrast, our decoding has a linear dependence on both m and d. Note that, unlike the
first two categories, the third line of work (to which ours also belongs) gives deterministic guarantees and
work with arbitrary datasets, with no probabilistic assumptions; we elaborate on these and do a detailed
comparison with ours below. We skip the comparison with the first two categories, as it would not be a
fair comparison because the underlying setting is different – results in the first two categories are based on
statistical assumptions on data/algorithm and inaccurate gradient recovery, whereas, results in the third
category make no assumption on the data/algorithm and allow exact gradient recovery.
We want to emphasize that all these works use gradient descent (GD) or stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) as their optimization algorithm, which is a data-parallelization method; in this paper, additionally,
we also use coordinate descent (CD) algorithm for optimization, which is a model-parallelization method
and is preferred over GD in some applications; see Section 1 for more details on this. As will be evident
from Section 5, making CD secure against Byzantine attacks is arguably more intricate than securing GD.
We divide this section into three categories: first we compare the redundancy-based methods for GD in
Section3.1,andthenCDinSection3.2. Sinceweusematrix-vector(MV)multiplicationasacoresubroutine
for both GD and CD, we also compare related work on this in Section 3.3.
3.1 Gradient Descent (GD)
In this section, we do a detailed comparison with [CWCP18] and [YLR+19], which are the closest related
works that also combat Byzantine adversaries using redundant computations.
For the sake of comparison, assume that t ≤ m−1 workers are corrupt. The coding scheme of Chen et
2
al. [CWCP18], which they called Draco, requires repetition of each data point (2t+1) times, storing each
copy at different workers. This gives the storage redundancy factor of (2t+1) in Draco, whereas, our
coding method requires storage redundancy factor of 2(1+(cid:15)) = 2m , which is a constant even if t is a
m−2t
constant (< 1) fraction of m.12 Since each worker in Draco is doing (2t+1)-factor more computation for
2
eachGDiteration(thansimplycomputingthegradientsasinplaindistributedGD),thecomputationalcost
at workers also grows by the same factor, which is a significant downside of their scheme. In contrast, our
schemeonlyrequiresO( m )morecomputationatworker, whichisaconstanteveniftisaconstant(< 1)
m−2t 2
fraction of m. This significantly reduces the computation time at the worker nodes in our scheme compared
toDraco,withoutsacrificingmuchonthecomputationtimerequiredbythemasternode–thedecodingat
master in Draco takes O(md) time, whereas, our scheme requires O( m (n+d)m) time, which is a factor
m−2t
ofO( m (1+n))morethanDraco. Inhigh-dimensionalsettings, wherenisnotmuchbiggerthand, and
m−2t d
t is a constant (< 1) fraction of m, this overhead is constant. Overall, for a constant fraction of corruption,
2
say, t = m, Draco requires Ω(t) times more storage and computation at workers than our scheme (which
3
could be significant in large-scale settings), and requires Ω(1+ n) times less computation at master. Note
d
that the computation time at workers scales at least as Ω(nd), which dominates the time taken by master
m
(since n,d are typically much larger than m), so our scheme will be faster than Draco with respect to the
overall running time. Note that the coding in Draco is restricted to data replication redundancy, as they
encode the gradient as done in [TLDK17], enabling application to (non)-convex problems; in contrast, we
encode the data enabling significantly smaller redundancy, and apply it to learn generalized linear models,
and is also applicable to MV multiplication.
12TohighlightthestorageredundancygainofourmethodoverthatofDraco,considerthefollowingtwoconcretescenarios,
where the data matrix X ∈ Rn×d consists of nd real numbers: (i) In a large setup with m = 1000 worker nodes, if we want
resiliency against t = 100 corrupt nodes (1/10 nodes are corrupt), our method requires redundancy of 2.5, whereas Draco
requiresredundancyof201(i.e.,weneedtostoreonly2.5×ndrealnumbers,whereasDracostores201×ndrealnumbers),a
multiplicative-factor of > 80 more than ours. (ii) In a moderate setup with m=150 and t=50 (1/3 nodes are corrupt), the
redundancyofourmethodis6,whereasDracorequiresredundancyof101,amultiplicative-factorof≈17morethanours.
13
Yu et al. [YLR+19] (which is a concurrent work13) proposes Lagrange coded computing in a distributed
framework to compute any multivariate polynomial of the input data and simultaneously provides resilience
againststragglers,securityagainstadversaries,andprivacyofthedatasetagainstcollusionofworkers. They
leverage the Lagrange polynomial to create computation redundancy among workers, and using standard
Reed-Solomon decoding, they can tolerate both erasures/stragglers and errors/adversaries. Their method
provide privacy by adding random elements from the field (which in the case of gradient computation is the
field of all matrices of a certain dimension) while doing the polynomial interpolation. This is a standard
methodinShamirsecretsharingscheme[Sha79]thatiswidelyusedininformation-theoreticallysecureMPC
protocols[CDN15]toprovideprivacyofusers’data. Forthesakeofcomparisonoftheresourcerequirements
ofourschemeandtheonein[YLR+19],considerthetaskoflinearregression(theconcretemachinelearning
application studied in [YLR+19]). In the following, we assume that m−1 −δ workers are corrupt, which
2
corresponds to (cid:15)= m −1 in our setting; here δ can take any value in [0: m−1]. (i) The storage overhead
1+2δ 2
of our scheme is m , whereas, in [YLR+19], it is m , which is roughly the same as ours. For example,
δ+1/2 δ+1
to tolerate m corrupt workers (i.e., δ = m−3), the storage overhead of our scheme and of [YLR+19] is a
3 6
multiplicative factor of 6 and 6 ≈ 6, respectively. (ii) The encoding time complexity of our scheme is
1+3/m
O(nd(m−2δ)), whereas, itisO(mlog2(m) nd )in[YLR+19]. Notethatforconstantδ (i.e., corruptionclose
δ+1
to 1/2), the encoding time of our scheme is much less (by a factor of O(mlog2(m))) than that of [YLR+19],
whereas, for corruption cm, where c < 1, the scheme of [YLR+19] takes O( m )-factor less time in
2 log2(m)
encodingthanours. (iii)Thecomputationtimeateachworkerpergradientcomputationinbothourscheme
and[YLR+19]isroughlythesame–oursrequiresO( nd )timeand[YLR+19]requiresO( nd )time. (iv)The
1+2δ 1+δ
decoding time complexity per gradient computation in [YLR+19] is O(mlog2(m)d), whereas, ours requires
O((1+(cid:15))(n+d)m) time. Note that when n is not much bigger than d and we want a constant fraction of
corruption, say, m corruption, then their decoding complexity is worse than ours by a logarithmic factor.
3
Also note that our decoding algorithm is arguably simpler than theirs. (v) For per gradient computation,
each worker respectively sends n+d and d real numbers in ours and the scheme in [YLR+19]. Note that
1+2δ
if n ≤ dm and to tolerate a constant fraction of corruption, say, m corruption, each worker sends roughly
3
O(m)lessdatainourschemethanthatof[YLR+19]. Overall,ifwewanttoleranceagainst m corruptworker
3
nodes, then both our scheme and the one in [YLR+19] have similar resource requirements, except for that
our scheme has a much better communication complexity (by a factor of O(m)) from workers to the master,
whereas, the encoding time complexity (which is a one-time process) of [YLR+19] is better than ours by a
factor of O( m ).
log2(m)
3.2 Coordinate Descent (CD)
Even for the straggler problem, we are only aware of one work by Karakus et al. [KSDY19] that, in addition
todistributedGD,alsostudiesdistributedCD,andthatforquadraticproblems(e.g.,linear/ridgeregression)
only. Italsodoesdataencodingandachieveslowredundancyandlowcomplexity,byallowingconvergenceto
anapproximateratherthanexactsolution. Asfarasweknow, oursisthefirstworkthatstudiesdistributed
CD under Byzantine attacks and provides an efficient solution, much better than the replication-based
solution (see Remark 7). At the heart of our solution for CD is the matrix-vector (MV) multiplication
procedure that we develop in this paper; and it is the specific regular structure of our encoding matrix
(given in (11), designed for the MV multiplication) that allows for partially updating the coordinates of the
parameter vector in each CD iteration. Note that a general-purpose encoding matrix for MV multiplication
may not be applicable for the CD algorithm.
It has been observed earlier in several works (see, for example, [LLP+18,DCG16]) that gradient compu-
tation in GD for linear regression can be reduced to MV multiplication, and any general-purpose code for
MV multiplication can be used to provide a solution for gradient computation. As far as we know, ours is
the first paper that makes the connection of CD and MV multiplication, and provides an efficient solution
13Yu et al. [YLR+19] is concurrent to our conference versions in Allerton 2018 [DSD18] and ISIT 2019 [DSD19,DD19], on
whichthispaperisbased.
14
forCD(whichisalsoresilienttoByzantineattacks)forlearninggeneralizedlinearmodels. Notethat,unlike
GD, not any general-purpose code for MV multiplication can be used for CD: the main challenge in CD
comes from the fact that we only update a small number of coordinates of the parameter vector in each
CD iteration; when we encode the data and iteratively update some coordinates of the (encoded) parameter
vector using the encoded data, we need to make sure that this update in the encoded parameter vector
is reconciled with the update in the original parameter vector. This is fundamentally different from GD
iterations. See Section 5 for more details.
3.3 Matrix-Vector Multiplication
Forthetaskofa morefundamentalproblem ofmatrix-vector(MV)multiplicationinthepresenceofByzan-
tine adversaries, which is at the core of the optimization algorithms in this paper, we are only aware of two
concurrent works [YLR+19] (see Footnote 13) and [DCG19]14 that provide (coding-theoretic) solutions to
this problem. In the following, we do a detailed comparison of our solution with both of these works and
also discuss the (dis)similarities.
WehavealreadydoneadetailedcomparisonwithYuetal.[YLR+19](concurrentwork,seeFootnote13)
with respect to gradient descent in Section 3.1. For the problem of MV multiplication, the storage require-
ment, computation time per worker, and communication complexity to/from workers is the same in both
ours and [YLR+19]. The comparison of encoding time complexity is same as above; however, for a constant
corruption, say, m corrupt workers, our method outperforms the one in [YLR+19] in terms of the decoding
3
time complexity by a factor of O(log2(m)). Note that, unlike [YLR+19], we make a fundamental connection
of handling Byzantine errors with the sparse reconstruction (or the real-error correction) problem from the
compressive sensing literature [CT05].
Dutta et al. [DCG19] (concurrent work, see Footnote 14) focuses on matrix-vector (MV) multiplication.
Though their main focus is on providing resilience against stragglers, they also mention that handling
stragglers is very different than handling errors, as it requires to correct errors over real numbers, and,
unlike stragglers, we do not know which workers are corrupt. Similar to our observation, they also note
that since the matrices and vectors have entries from real numbers, the decoding problem reduces to the
sparse reconstruction problem from the compressive sensing literature [CT05] and they also provide such a
reduction. Apart from these similarities, our solution for MV multiplication differs from that of [DCG19] in
severalimportantways: (i)[DCG19]providesadetailedsolutiontothedistributedMVmultiplicationforthe
straggler problem for the case when the number of rows in the matrix is smaller than the number of workers
nodes. As mentioned in [DCG19], this method can be easily generalized to the more general case when
the matrix is of arbitrary dimension, in which case, first we can divide the rows of the matrix into several
sub-matrices, each having number of rows smaller than the number of workers, and then apply the above
method independently to each sub-matrix. This simple extension may work (without losing efficiency) for
thestraggler/erasureproblem,however,leadstoahighlyinefficientsolutionfortheadversary/errorproblem.
The reason being that, in the presence of Byzantine workers, if we solve the sparse reconstruction problem
for each sub-matrix separately, this would be inefficient, as the decoding would then be computationally
expensive. Toremedythis,weexploittheblockerrorpatternanduseasimpleideaoflinearlycombiningthe
response vectors from each worker using coefficients drawn from an absolutely continuous distribution, so
thatweonlyneedtodojust onecomputationforsolvingthesparseconstructionproblem. Thissignificantly
reduces the decoding complexity; see Section 4.1 for details. (ii) [DCG19] only shows a connection to
the sparse recovery problem, whereas, we provide a complete solution, with a concrete sparse recovery (or
real-error correction) matrix and resource (encoding/decoding time, storage, communication) requirement
analysis. (iii) Our encoding matrix (given in (11)) to encode data matrices of arbitrary dimensions is very
sparse and highly structured which allows us to apply that construction to CD algorithm, which, as far we
know, has not been connected with MV multiplication before. Also, ours is the first paper that provides a
non-trivial and efficient (data encoding) solution to CD in the presence of a Byzantine adversary. (iv) We
14Theconferenceversion[DCG16]onlystudiesthestragglerproblem,andthejournalversion[DCG19]brieflymentionshow
theirresultsfrom[DCG16]canbeextendedtohandleadversarialnodes,andwedescribethatinthissection.
15
also want to mention that the focus in [DCG19] is on making the encoded matrix sparse (at the expense
of increased computation at workers) so that workers need to compute shorter dot products, whereas, in
this paper, we make the encoding matrix sparse (much sparser than the encoded matrix of [DCG19]) to get
efficient encoding/decoding.
4 Our Solution to Gradient Computation
In this section, we describe the core technical part of our two-round approach for gradient computation
described in Section 2.4 – a method for performing matrix-vector (MV) multiplication in a distributed
manner in the presence of a malicious adversary who can corrupt at most t of the m worker nodes. Here,
the matrix is fixed and we want to right-multiply a vector with this matrix.
GivenafixedmatrixA∈Rnr×nc andavectorv∈Rnc ,wewanttocomputeAv inadistributedmanner
in the presence of at most t corrupt worker nodes; see Section 2.3 for details on our adversary model. Our
methodisbasedondataencodinganderrorcorrectionoverrealnumbers,wherethematrixAisencodedand
distributed among all the worker nodes, and the master node recovers the MV product Av using real-error
correction; see Figure 1. We will think of our encoding matrix as S = [ST ST,...,ST], where each S is
1 2 m i
a p×n matrix and pm ≥ n . We will derive the matrix S in Section 4.2. For the value of p, looking
r r
ahead, we will set p=(cid:100) n (cid:101), which is a constant multiple of n even if t is a constant (< 1) fraction of m
m−2t m 2
(e.g., if t = m, we would have p = 3n). For i ∈ [m], we store the matrix S A at the i’th worker node. As
3 m i
describedinSection2,thecomputationproceedsasfollows: Themastersendsv toalltheworkernodesand
receives {S Av+e }m back from them. Let e = [e ,e ,...,e ]T for every i ∈ [p]. Note that e = 0 if
i i i=1 i i1 i2 ip i
the i’th node is honest, otherwise can be arbitrary. In order to find the set of corrupt worker nodes, master
equivalently writes {S Av+e }m as p systems of linear equations.
i i i=1
h˜ (v)=S˜ Av+e˜ , i∈[p] (8)
i i i
where, for every i ∈ [p], e˜ = [e ,e ,...,e ]T, and S˜ is an m×n matrix whose j’th row is equal to
i 1i 2i mi i r
the i’th row of S , for every j ∈ [m]. Note that at most t entries in each e˜ are non-zero. Observe that
j i
{S Av+e }m and {S˜ Av+e˜ }p are equivalent systems of linearequations, and we can get onefrom the
i i i=1 i i i=1
other.
Note that S˜ ’s constitute the encoding matrix S, which we have to design. In the following, we will
i
design these matrices S˜ ’s (which in turn will determine the encoding matrix S), with the help of another
i
matrixF,whichwillbeusedtofindtheerrorlocations,i.e.,identitiesofthecompromisedworkernodes. We
will design the matrix F (of dimension k×m, where k < m – here k is determined by the error-correction
capability, and we will set k =2t; see Section 4.4 for more details) and the matrices S˜ ’s such that
i
C.1 FS˜ =0 for every i∈[p].
i
C.2 For any t-sparse u∈Rm, we can efficiently find all the non-zero locations of u from Fu.
C.3 For any T ⊂ [m] such that |T| ≥ (m−t), let S denote the |T|p×n matrix obtained from S by
T r
restricting it to all the S ’s for which i∈T. We want S to be of full column rank.
i T
If we can find such matrices, then we can recover the desired MV multiplication Av exactly: briefly, C.1
and C.2 will allow us to locate the corrupt worker nodes; once we have found them, we can discard all the
information that the master node had received from them. This will yield S Av, where S is the |T|p×n
T T r
matrix obtained from S by restricting it to S ’s for all i∈T, where T is the set of all honest worker nodes.
i
Now, by C.3, since S is of full column rank, we can recover Av from S Av exactly. Details follow.
T T
Suppose we have matrices F and S˜ ’s such that C.1 holds. Now, multiplying (8) by F yields
i
f :=Fh˜ (v)=Fe˜ , (9)
i i i
for every i ∈ [p], where (cid:107)e˜ (cid:107) ≤ t. In Section 4.1, we give our approach for finding all the corrupt worker
i 0
nodes with the help of any error locator matrix F. Then, in Section 4.2, we give a generic construction for
16
M broadcasts w
w
M Dec
w X 1) S (1
W W W W
1 2 3 m
S(1)X S(1)X S(1)X S(1)X
1 2 3 m
e+wX)1(S 2
2
M broadcasts f(cid:48)(w)
Xw Compute f(cid:48)(w)
M Dec
f(cid:48)(w)
) w S 3 X (1
w
) S m (1 X ) w + e
m S (
2) X
1
T f(cid:48) (
W W W W
1 2 3 m
S(2)XT S(2)XT S(2)XT S(2)XT
1 2 3 m
)w((cid:48)fTX)2(S
2
w ←− prox (w−α∇f(w))
h,α
∇f(w)=XTf(cid:48)(w)
S 3 X (2 ) S m (2 X ) f T ((cid:48) T f ((cid:48) w ) w +
) e
+ m
e
3
Figure 1 This figure shows our 2-round approach to the Byzantine-resilient distributed gradient descent to optimize (1) for
learningageneralizedlinearmodel. Sincethegradientatwisequalto∇f(w)=XTf(cid:48)(w)(see(7)),wecomputeitin2rounds,
using a matrix-vector (MV) multiplication as a subroutine in each round. In the 1st round, first we compute Xw, and then
computef(cid:48)(w)fromXw –sincethej’thentryofXw isequalto(cid:104)xj,w(cid:105), wecancomputef(cid:48)(w)fromXw (seeSection2.4).
In the 2nd round we compute XTf(cid:48)(w) – which is equal to ∇f(w) – using another application of MV multiplication. For a
matrixAandavectorv,tomakeourdistributedMVmultiplicationAvByzantine-resilient,weencodeAusingasparsematrix
S=[ST
1
ST
m
... ST
m
]T anddistributeSiAtoworkeri(denotedbyWi). Notethatinthefirstround,wehaveA=X,v=w,
andweencodeXusingS(1),andinthesecondround,wehaveA=XT,v=f(cid:48)(w),andencodeXT usingS(2). Theadversary
cancorruptatmosttworkers(thecompromisedonesaredenotedinredcolor),potentiallydifferentsetsoftworkersindifferent
rounds. The master node (denoted by M) broadcasts v to all the workers. Each worker performs the local MV product and
sendsitbacktoM.IfWi iscorrupt,thenitcansendanarbitraryvector. Oncethemasterhasreceivedallthevectors(outof
whichtmaybeerroneous),itsendsthemtothedecoder(denotedbyDec),whichoutputsthecorrectMVproductAv.
designing S˜ ’s (and, in turn, our encoding matrix S) such that C.1 and C.3 hold. In Section 4.3, we show
i
how to compute the desired matrix-vector product Av efficiently, once we have discarded all the data from
the corrupt works nodes. Then, in Section 4.4, we will give details of the error locator matrix F that we use
in our construction.
Remark 8. As we will see in Section 4.2, the structure of our encoding matrix S is independent of our error
locator matrix F. Specifically, the repetitive structure of the non-zero entries of S as well as their locations
will not change irrespective of what the F matrix is. This makes our construction very generic, as we can
choose whichever F suits our needs the best (in terms of how many erroneous indices it can locate and with
what decoding complexity), and it won’t affect the structure of our encoding matrix at all – only the non-zero
entries might change, neither their repetitive format, nor their locations!
4.1 Finding The Corrupt Worker Nodes
Observe that supp(e˜ ) may not be the same for all i∈[p], but we know, for sure, that the non-zero locations
i
in all these error vectors occur within the same set of t locations. Let I = (cid:83)p supp(e˜ ), which is the set
i=1 i
of all corrupt worker nodes. Note that |I| ≤ t. We want to find this set I efficiently, and for that we note
the following crucial observation. Since the non-zero entries of all the error vectors e˜ ’s occur in the same
i
set I, a random linear combination of e˜ ’s has support equal to I with probability one, if the coefficients
i
of the linear combination are chosen from an absolutely continuous probability distribution. This idea has
appearedbeforein[ME08]inthecontextofcompressedsensingforrecoveringarbitrarysetsofjointlysparse
17
signals that have been measured by the same measurement matrix.
Definition1. Aprobabilitydistributioniscalledabsolutelycontinuous,ifeveryeventofmeasurezerooccurs
with probability zero.
It is well-known that a distribution is absolutely continuous if and only if it can be represented as an
integral over an integrable density function [Bil95, Theorem 31.8, Chapter 6]. Since Gaussian and uniform
distributions have an explicit integrable density function, both are absolutely continuous. Conversely, dis-
crete distributions are not absolutely continuous. Now we state a lemma from [ME08] that shows that a
random linear combination of the error vectors (where coefficients are chosen from an absolutely continuous
distribution) preserves the support with probability one.
Lemma 1 ([ME08]). Let I = (cid:83)p supp(e˜ ), and let eˆ = (cid:80)p α e˜ , where α ’s are sampled i.i.d. from an
i=1 i i=1 i i i
absolutely continuous distribution. Then with probability 1, we have supp(eˆ)=I.
From (9) we have f = Fe˜ for every i ∈ [p]. Take a random linear combination of f ’s with coefficients
i i i
α ’s chosen i.i.d. from an absolutely continuous distribution, for example, the Gaussian distribution. Let
i
˜f =α ( (cid:80)p f )=α ( (cid:80)p Fe˜ )=F( (cid:80)p α e˜ )=Fe˜, where e˜ = (cid:80)p α e˜ . Note that, with probability
i i=1 i i i=1 i i=1 i i i=1 i i
1, supp(e˜) is equal to the set of all corrupt worker nodes, and we want to find this set efficiently. In other
words, given Fe˜, we want to find supp(e˜) efficiently. For this, we need to design a k×m matrix F (where
k < m) such that for any sparse error vector e ∈ Rm, we can efficiently find supp(e) from f = Fe. Many
such matrices have been known in the literature that can handle different levels of sparsity with varying
decoding complexity. We can choose any of these matrices depending on our need, and this will not affect
the design of our encoding matrix S. In particular, we will use a k×m Vandermonde matrix along with the
Reed-Solomon type decoding, which can correct up to k/2 errors and has decoding complexity of O(m2);
see Section 4.4 for details.
Time required in finding the corrupt worker nodes. The time taken in finding the corrupt worker
nodes is equal to the sum of the time taken in the following 3 tasks. (i) Computing Fe˜ for every i ∈ [p]:
i
Note that we can get Fe˜ by multiplying (8) with F. Since F is a k×m matrix, and we compute Fh˜ (v) for
i i
p systems, this requires O(pkm) time. (ii) Taking a random linear combination of p vectors each of length
m, which takes O(pm) time. (iii) Applying Lemma 2 (in Section 4.4) once to find the error locations, which
takes O(m2) time. Since p is much bigger than m, the total time complexity is O(pkm).
4.2 Designing The Encoding Matrix S
Now we give a generic construction for designing S˜ ’s such that C.1 and C.3 hold. Fix any k×m matrix F
i
such that we can efficiently find e from Fe, provided e is sufficiently sparse. We can assume, without loss
of generality, that F has full row-rank; otherwise, there will be redundant observations in Fe that we can
discard and make F smaller by discarding the redundant rows. Let N(F) ⊂ Rm denote the null-space of
F. Since rank(F) = k, dimension of N(F) is q = (m−k). Let {b ,b ,...,b } be a basis of N(F), and let
1 2 q
b =[b b ...b ]T, for every i∈[q]. We set b ’s the columns of the following matrix F⊥:
i i1 i2 im i
b b ... b 
11 21 q1
b b ... b 
F⊥ =   1 . 2 2 . 2 . q . 2  (10)
 . . . . . . . . 
 
b b ... b
1m 2m qm m×q
The following property of F⊥ will be used for recovering the MV product in Section 4.3.
Claim 1. For any subset T ⊂[m], such that |T|≥(m−t), let F⊥ be the |T|×q matrix, which is equal to
T
the restriction of F⊥ to the rows in T. Then F⊥ is of full column rank.
T
18
Proof. Note that q =m−k, where k =2t. So, if we show that any q rows of F⊥ are linearly independent,
then, this in turn will imply that for every T ⊂ [m] with |T| ≥ (m−t), the sub-matrix F⊥ will have full
T
column rank. In the following we show that any q rows of F⊥ are linearly independent. To the contrary,
supposenot; andletT(cid:48) ⊂[m]with|T(cid:48)|=q besuchthattheq×q matrixF⊥ isnotafullrankmatrix. This
T(cid:48)
implies that there exists a non-zero c(cid:48) ∈Rq such that F⊥ c(cid:48) =0. Let b=F⊥c(cid:48). Note that b(cid:54)=0 (because
T(cid:48)
columns of F⊥ are linearly independent) and also that (cid:107)b(cid:107) ≤ m−q = k. Now, since FF⊥ = 0, we have
0
Fb=0, which contradicts the fact that any k columns of F are linearly independent.
Now we design S˜ ’s. For i∈[p], we set S˜ as follows:
i i
0 ... 0 b b ... b 0 ... 0
11 21 l1
0 ... 0 b b ... b 0 ... 0
S˜ i =    . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . 2 2 . . . 2 . . . . . . l2 . . . . . . . . .   
 
0 ... 0 b b ... b 0 ... 0
1m 2m lm
where l =q if i<p; otherwise l =n −(p−1)q. The first (i−1)q and the last n −[(i−1)q+l] columns
r r
of S˜ are zero. This also implies that the number of rows in each S is p=(cid:100)n /q(cid:101).
i i r
Claim 2. For every i∈[p], we have FS˜ =0.
i
Proof. Byconstruction, the null-spaceof F is N(F)=span{b ,b ,...,b }, which impliesthat Fb =0, for
1 2 q i
every i∈[q]. Since all the columns of S˜ ’s are either 0 or b for some j ∈[q], the claim follows.
i j
The above constructed matrices S˜ ’s give the following encoding matrix S for the i’th worker node:
i i
b ...b 
1i qi
S i =

 
... 
  (11)
 
b ...b
 1i qi 
b ...b
1i li p×nr
All the unspecified entries of S are zero. The matrix S is for encoding the data for worker i. By stacking
i i
up the S ’s on top of each other gives us our desired encoding matrix S.
i
To get efficient encoding, we want S to be as sparse as possible. Since S is completely determined by
F⊥, whose columns are the basis vectors of N(F), it suffices to find a sparse basis for N(F). It is known
that finding the sparsest basis for the null-space of a matrix is NP-hard [CP86]. Note that we can always
find the basis vectors of N(F) by reducing F to its row-reduced-echelon-form (RREF) using the Gaussian
elimination [HK71]. This will result in F⊥ whose last q rows forms a q ×q identity matrix. Note that
q = m−k, where k = 2t. So, if the corruption threshold t is very small as compared to m, the F⊥ that
we obtain by the RREF will be very sparse – only the first 2t rows may be dense. Since computing S is
equivalent to computing F⊥, and we can compute F⊥ in O(k2m) time using the Gaussian elimination, the
time complexity of computing S is also O(k2m).
Now we prove an important property of the encoding matrix S that will be crucial for recovery of the
desired matrix-vector product.
Claim 3. For any T ⊂[m] such that |T|≥(m−t), let S denote the |T|p×n matrix obtained from S by
T r
restricting it to all the blocks S ’s for which i∈T. Then S is of full column rank.
i T
Proof. For i∈[p−1], let B =[(i−1)q+1:iq] and B =[(p−1)q+1:n −(p−1)q], where we see B ’s as
i p r i
a collection of some column indices. Consider any two distinct i,j ∈[p]. It is clear that for any two vectors
u ∈ B ,u ∈ B , we have supp(u )∩supp(u ) = φ, which means that all the columns in distinct B ’s are
1 i 2 j 1 2 i
linearly independent. So, to prove the claim, we only need to show that the columns within the same B ’s
i
are linearly independent. Fix any i∈[p], and consider the |T|p×q sub-matrix S(i) of S , which is obtained
T T
19
by restricting S to the columns in B . There are precisely |T| non-zero rows in S(i), which are equal to the
T i T
rows of the matrix F⊥ defined in Claim 1. We have already shown in the proof of Claim 1 that F⊥ is of full
T T
column rank. Therefore, S(i) is also of full column rank. This concludes the proof of Claim 3.
T
Since S
T
is of full column rank, in principle, we can recover any vector u∈Rnr from S
T
u. In the next
section, we show an efficient way for this recovery.
4.3 Recovering The Matrix-Vector Product Av
Once the master has found the set I of corrupt worker nodes, it discards all the data received from them.
Let T =[m]\I ={i ,i ,...,i } be the set of all honest worker nodes, where f =(m−|I|)≥(m−t). Let
1 2 f
r=[rTrT ...rT], where r =S Av+e . All the r ’s from the honest worker nodes can be written as
1 2 m i i i i
r =S Av, (12)
T T
where S is as defined in Claim 3, and r is also defined analogously and equal to the restriction of r to all
T T
the r ’s for which i∈T. Since S has full column rank (by Claim 3), in principle, we can recover Av from
i T
(12). Next we show how to recover Av efficiently, by exploiting the structure of S.
Let ˜r = [r ,r ,...,r ]T, for every j ∈ [p]. The repetitive structure of S ’s (see (11)) allows us to
j i1j i2j ifj i
write (12) equivalently in terms of p smaller systems.
˜r =F (Av) , for j ∈[p], (13)
j j Bj
where, for j ∈ [p−1], B = [(i−1)q+1 : iq] and F = F⊥, and B = [(p−1)q+1 : n −(p−1)q] and
i j T p r
F is equal to the restriction of F⊥ to its first (n −(p−1)q) columns. Since F⊥ has full column rank (by
p T r T
Claim 1), we can compute (Av) for all i∈[p], by multiplying (13) by F+ =(FTF )−1FT, which it called
Bi j j j j
the Moore-Penrose inverse of F . Since Av = [(Av)T ,(Av)T ,...,(Av)T )]T, we can recover the desired
MV product Av.
j B1 B2 Bp
Time Complexity analysis. ThetaskofobtainingAvfromS Avreducesto(i)computingF+ =(F⊥)+
T j T
once,whichtakesO(q2|T|)timenaïvely;(ii)computingF+ once,whichtakesatmostO(q2|T|)timenaïvely;
p
and (iii) computing the MV products F+˜r for every j ∈[p], which takes O(pq|T|) time in total. Since p is
j j
much bigger than q, the total time taken in recovering Av from S Av is O(pq|T|)=O(pm2).
T
4.4 Designing The Error Locator Matrix F
In this section, we design a k×m matrix F (where k <m) such that for any sparse error vector e∈Rm, we
can uniquely and efficiently recover e (and, therefore, supp(e)) from the under-determined system of linear
equations f = Fe ∈ Rk. This is related to the sparse representation problem, where one would like to find
the sparsest representation of f in terms of the linear combination of the columns of F, i.e., minimizing
(cid:107)e(cid:107) subject to the constraint that f = Fe. This problem is of combinatorial nature and is known to be
0
NP-hard[CT05]. Tomakethisproblemcomputationallytractable,CandesandTao[CT05]showedthatifF
satisfies a certain regularity condition (which they named the restricted isometry property (RIP)), then the
sparsest reconstruction problem can be reduced to minimizing (cid:107)e(cid:107) := (cid:80)m |e | subject to the constraint
1 i=1 i
that f = Fe, which can be efficiently solved using a linear program. They also showed that a random
Gaussian matrix satisfies the RIP condition. A common problem with such random constructions is that
they may not work with small block-lengths (in our setting, m is the number of workers which may not be a
big number), and can only correct a constant fraction of errors, where the constant is very small. We need
a deterministic construction that can handle a constant fraction (ideally up to 1/2) of errors and that works
with small block-lengths.
Akçakaya and Tarokh [AT08] proposed an efficient solution to the sparse representation problem using
Vandermonde matrices. To construct them, take m distinct non-zero elements z ,z ,...,z from R, and
1 2 m
20
consider the following k×m Vandermonde matrix F.
 1 1 1 ... 1 
 z z z ... z 
 1 2 3 m 
 z2 z2 z2 ... z2 
F= 1 2 3 m  (14)
 

. .
.
. .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 

 
zk−1 zk−1 zk−1 ... zk−1
1 2 3 m
k×m
For the above F, it was shown in [AT08] that, if |supp(e)| ≤ k/2, then the Reed-Solomon type decoding
can be used for exact reconstruction of e from f = Fe.15 Furthermore, their decoding algorithm is efficient
and runs in O(m2) time. The results in [AT08] are given for complex vector spaces, and they hold over real
numbers also. Below we state the sparse recovery result (specialized to reals) from [AT08].
Lemma 2 ([AT08]). Let F be the k×m matrix as defined in (14). Let e∈Rm be an arbitrary vector with
|supp(e)|≤k/2. We can exactly recover the vector e from f =Fe in O(m2) time.
Note that F is a k×m matrix, where k < m. Choosing k is in our hands, and larger the k, more the
number of errors we can correct (but at the expense of increased storage and computation); see Section 4.5
for more details.
4.5 Resource Requirement Analysis
Inthissection,weanalyzethetotalamountofresources(storage,computation,andcommunication)required
by our method for computing gradients in the presence of t (out of m) adversarial worker nodes and prove
Theorem 1. Fix an (cid:15)>0. Let the corruption threshold t satisfy t≤(cid:98)((cid:15)/(1+(cid:15)))·(m/2)(cid:99).
As described earlier in Section 2.4, we compute the gradient ∇f(w) = XTf(cid:48)(w) in two-rounds; and in
each round we use the Byzantine-tolerant MV multiplication, which we have developed in Section 4, as a
subroutine; see Figure 1 for a pictorial representation of our scheme. We encode X to compute f(cid:48)(w) in
the 1st round: first compute Xw using MV multiplication and then locally compute f(cid:48)(w). To compute
XTf(cid:48)(w) (which is equal to the gradient) in the 2nd round, we encode XT and compute XTf(cid:48)(w). Let S(1)
and S(2) be the encoding matrices of dimensions p m×n and p m×d, respectively, to encode X and XT,
1 2
respectively. Here, p = (cid:100)n/q(cid:101) and p = (cid:100)d/q(cid:101), where q = m−k. Since k = 2t (by Lemma 2), we have
1 2
q =(m−k)≥m/(1+(cid:15)).
4.5.1 Storage Requirement
Each worker node i stores two matrices S(1)X and S(2)XT. The first one is a p ×(d+1) matrix, and
i i 1
the second one is a p ×n matrix. So, the total amount of storage at all worker nodes is equal to storing
2
(p (d+1)+p n)×m real numbers. Since p ≤(cid:100)(1+(cid:15))n(cid:101) and p ≤(cid:100)(1+(cid:15))d(cid:101), the total storage is
1 2 1 m 2 m
(cid:0) (cid:1)
p (d+1)+p n m=p m(d+1)+p mn
1 2 1 2
<[(1+(cid:15))n+m](d+1)+[(1+(cid:15))d+m]n
=(1+(cid:15))n(2d+1)+m(n+d+1).
wherethefirsttermisroughlyequaltoa2(1+(cid:15))factormorethanthesizeofX. Notethatthesecondterm
does not contribute much to the total storage as compared to the first term, because the number of worker
nodes m is much smaller than both n and d. In fact, if m−k divides both n and d, then the second term
vanishes. Since |X| is an n×d matrix, the total storage at each worker node is almost equal to 2(1+(cid:15))|X|,
m
which is a constant factor of the optimal, that is, |X|, and the total storage is roughly equal to 2(1+(cid:15))|X|.
m
15Notethat, sinceanyk columnsof F(whichistheVandermondematrix) arelinearlyindependent, ifthere existsavector
esuchthat|supp(e)|≤k/2andesatisfiesf =Feforafixedf,theneisunique.
21
4.5.2 Computational Complexity
We can divide the computational complexity of our scheme as follows:
• Encoding the data matrix. Since, for every i ≤ k and j > k, the total number of non-zero entries in S(1)
i
and S(1) are at most n and p , respectively (see Section 4.2 for details), the computational complexity for
j 1
computing S(1)X for each i ≤ k, and S(1)X for each j > k, is O(nd) and O(p d), respectively. So, the
i j 1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
encoding time for computing S(1)X is equal to O(k(nd)+(m−k)(p d))=O ( (cid:15) m+1)nd . Similarly,
1 1+(cid:15)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
we can show that the encoding time for computing S(2)XT is also equal to O ( (cid:15) m+1)nd . Note that
1+(cid:15)
computing S(1) and S(2) take O(k2m) time each, which is much smaller, as compared to the encoding
(cid:16) (cid:17)
time. So, the total encoding time is O ( (cid:15) m+1)nd . Note that this encoding is to be done only once.
1+(cid:15)
• Computation at each worker node. Inthefirstround,uponreceivingwfromthemasternode,eachworker
icomputes(S(1)X)w,andreportsbacktheresultingvector. Similarly,inthesecondround,uponreceiving
i
f(cid:48)(w)fromthemasternode,eachworkericomputes(S(2)XT)f(cid:48)(w),andreportsbacktheresultingvector.
i
Since S(1)X and S(2)XT are p ×(d+1) and p ×n matrices, respectively, each worker node i requires
i i 1 2
O(p d+p n)=O((1+(cid:15))nd) time.
1 2 m
• Computation at the master node. The total time taken by the master node in both the rounds is the sum
of the time required in (i) finding the corrupt worker nodes in the 1st and 2nd rounds, which requires
O(p km) and O(p km) time, respectively (see Section 4.1), (ii) recovering Xw from S(1)Xw in the 1st
1 2 T
round, which requires O(p m2) time, (iii) computing f(cid:48)(w) from Xw, which takes O(n) time, and (iv)
1
recovering XTf(cid:48)(w) from S(2)XTf(cid:48)(w) in the 2nd round, which requires O(p m2) time (see Section 4.3).
T 2
Since k <m, the total time is equal to O((p +p )m2)=O((1+(cid:15))(n+d)m).
1 2
4.5.3 Communication Complexity
In each gradient computation, (i) master broadcasts (n+d) real numbers, d in the first round and n in the
second round; and (ii) each worker sends (cid:0) (1+(cid:15))n+d(cid:1) real numbers to master, (1+(cid:15))n in the first round
m m
and (1+(cid:15))d in the second round.
m
5 Our Solution to Coordinate Descent
In this section, we give a solution to the distributed coordinate descent (CD) under Byzantine attacks and
prove Theorem 2. To make our notation simpler, we remove the dependence on the label vector y in the
problem expression (5) and rewrite it as follows (this is without loss of generality in the light of Footnote 5
and Algorithm 1):
n
(cid:88)
arg min φ(Xw):= (cid:96)((cid:104)x ,w(cid:105)). (15)
i
w∈Rd
i=1
We want to optimize (15) using distributed CD, described in Section 2.2. As outlined in Section 2.5, we use
data encoding and error correction over real numbers for that. To combat the effect of adversary, we add
redundancy to enlarge the parameter space. Let X(cid:101)R = XR, where R = [R
1
R
2
... R
m
] ∈ Rd×pm with
pm ≥ d, and each R is a p×d matrix. We will determine the encoding matrix R later, after describing
i
whatpropertieswewantfromit. Forthevalueofp,lookingahead,whentisthenumberofcorruptworkers,
we will choose p= d , which is a constant multiple of d even if t is a constant fraction (< 1) of m (e.g.,
m−2t m 2
for t= m, we have p= 3d). We consider R’s which are of full row-rank. Let R+ :=RT(RRT)−1 denote its
3 m
Moore-Penrose inverse such that RR+ = I , where I is the d×d identity matrix. Note that R+ is of full
d d
22
column-rank. Let v = R+w be the transformed vector, which lies in a larger (than d) dimensional space.
Let R+ = [(R+)T (R+)T ... (R+)T]T, where each R+ := (R+) is a p×d matrix. With this, by letting
1 2 m i i
v = [vT vT ... vT]T, we have that v = R+w for every i ∈ [m]. Now, consider the following modified
1 2 m i i
problem over the encoded data.
arg min φ(X(cid:101) Rv). (16)
v∈Rpm
Observe that, since R is of full row-rank, min w∈Rd φ(Xw) is equal to min v∈Rpm φ(X(cid:101)Rv); and from an
optimal solution to one problem we can obtain an optimal solution to the other problem. We design an
encoding/decoding scheme such that when we optimize the encoded problem (16) using Algorithm 1, the
vector v that we get in each iteration is of the form v = R+w for some vector w ∈ Rd.16 In fact, our
encoding/decoding will ensure that the w for which v = R+w would be equal to the original parameter
vector in that iteration if we had run Algorithm 1 to solve (15). We need this property because in any CD
iteration t, we need access to the original parameter vector wt (such that vt =R+wt) to facilitate the local
parameter updates of vt,...,vt at the workers. See the paragraph after (18) for more details.
1 m
Now, instead of solving (15), we solve its encoded form (16) using Algorithm 1 (with decoding at the
master), where each worker i stores X(cid:101)R
i
= XR
i
and is responsible for updating (some coordinates of) v
i
.
In the following, let U ⊆ [p] be a fixed arbitrary subset of [p]. Let v0 := R+w0 for some w0 at time t = 0.
Suppose, at the beginning of the t’th iteration, we have vt =R+wt for some wt, and each worker i updates
vt according to
iU
v
i
t
U
+1 =v
i
t
U
−α
t
∇
iU
φ(X(cid:101) Rvt), (17)
where ∇
iU
φ(X(cid:101)Rvt) = (X(cid:101)R
iU
)Tφ(cid:48)(X(cid:101)Rvt). Recall that each R
i
is a d×p matrix, and each R+
i
:= (R+)
i
is a
p×dmatrix. WedenotebyR thed×|U|matrixobtainedbyrestrictingthecolumnsofR totheelements
iU i
of U. Analogously, we denote by R+ :=(R+) the |U|×d matrix obtained by restricting the rows of R+
iU iU i
to the elements of U. With this, we can write X(cid:101)R
iU
=XR
iU
. Now, (17) can be equivalently written as
v
i
t
U
+1 =v
i
t
U
−α
t
RT
iU
XTφ(cid:48)(X(cid:101) Rvt). (18)
In order to update vt , worker i requires φ(cid:48)(X(cid:101)Rvt), where X(cid:101)Rvt = (cid:80)m X(cid:101)Rvt and worker i has only
iU j=1 j j
(X(cid:101)R,vt). Since vt =R+wt, we have X(cid:101)Rvt =XRvt =Xwt. So, it suffices to compute Xwt at the master
i i
node – once master has Xwt, it can locally compute φ(cid:48)(Xwt) and send it to all the workers. Computing
Xwt is the distributed matrix-vector (MV) multiplication problem, where the matrix X is fixed and we
want to compute Xwt for any vector wt in the presence of an adversary. In Section 4, we give a method
for performing distributed MV multiplication in the presence of an adversary. Now we give an overview,
together-with an improvement on its computational complexity.
We encode X using an encoding matrix L ∈ R(p(cid:48)m)×n. Let L = [LT LT ... LT]T, where each L is a
1 2 m i
p(cid:48) ×n matrix with p(cid:48) = (cid:100) n (cid:101). Each L has p(cid:48) rows and n columns, and has the same structure as that
m−2t i
of S
i
from (11). Worker i stores X(cid:101)L
i
=L
i
X. To compute Xw, master sends w to all the workers; worker i
respondswithL Xw+e ,wheree =0ifthei’thworkerishonest,otherwisecanbearbitrary;uponreceiving
i i i
{L Xw+e }m , where at most t of the e ’s can be non-zero, master applies the decoding procedure and
i i i=1 i
recovers Xw back. We can improve the computational complexity of this method significantly by observing
that, in each iteration of our distributed CD algorithm, only a few coordinates of w get updated and the
rest of the coordinates remain unchanged. (Looking ahead, when each worker updates v ’s according to
iU
(17), it automatically updates w according to (6) – for a specific function f as defined in (21) – where
f(U)
v and w satisfy v = R+w.) This implies that for computing Xw, master only needs to send the updated
coordinates to the workers and keeps the result from the previous MV product with itself. This significantly
reduces the local computation at the worker nodes, as now they only need to perform a local MV product
of a matrix of size p(cid:48)×|f(U)| and a vector of length |f(U)|. See Section 4 for details.
16Ifsuchawexists,thenitisunique. ThisfollowsfromthefactthatR+ isoffullcolumn-rank.
23
Our goal in each iteration of CD is to update some coordinates of the original parameter vector w;
instead, by solving the encoded problem, we are updating coordinates of the transformed vector v. We
would like to design an algorithm/encoding such that it has exactly the same convergence properties as if
we are running the distributed CD on the original problem without any adversary. For this, naturally, we
would like our algorithm to satisfy the following property:
Update on any (small) subset of coordinates of w should be achieved by updating some (small) subset of
coordinates of v ’s; and, by updating those coordinates of v ’s, we should be able to efficiently recover the
i i
correspondingly updated coordinates of w. Furthermore, this should be doable despite the errors injected by
the adversary in every iteration of the algorithm.
Notethatifeachcoordinateofvdependsontoomanycoordinatesofw,thenupdatingafewcoordinates
of v may affect many coordinates of w, and it becomes information-theoretically impossible to satisfy the
aboveproperty(evenwithoutthepresenceofanadversary).17 ThisimposesarestrictionthateachrowofR+
musthavefewnon-zeroentries, insuchawaythatupdatingvt ’s, foranychoiceofU ⊆[p], willcollectively
iU
update only a subset (which may potentially depend on U) of coordinates of the original parameter vector
wt, and we can uniquely and efficiently recover those updated coordinates of wt, even from the erroneous
vectors{vt+1+e }m ,whereatmosttoutofmerrorvectors{e }m arenon-zeroandmayhavearbitrary
iU iU i=1 iU i=1
entries. In order to achieve this, we will design a sparse encoding matrix R+ (which in turn determines R),
that satisfies the following properties:
P.1 R+ has structured sparsity, which induces a map f :[p]→P([d]) (where P([d]) denotes the power set
of [d]) such that
(a) {f(i):i∈[p]}partitions{1,2,...,d},i.e.,foreveryi,j ∈[p],suchthati(cid:54)=j,wehavef(i)∩f(j)=
∅ and that (cid:83)p f(i)=[d].
i=1
(b) |f(i)|=|f(j)| for every i,j ∈[p−1], and |f(p)|≤|f(i)|, for any i∈[p−1].
(c) For any U ⊆ [p], define f(U) := ∪ f(j). If we update vt , ∀i ∈ [m], according to (18), it
j∈U iU
automatically updates wt according to
f(U)
wt+1 =wt −α XT φ(cid:48)(Xwt). (19)
f(U) f(U) t f(U)
If we set vt+1 :=vt and wt+1 :=wt , then vt+1 =R+wt+1, i.e., our invariant holds.
iU iU f(U) f(U)
Note that (19) is the same update rule if we run the plain CD algorithm to update w . In fact, our
f(U)
encoding matrix satisfies a stronger property, that vt+1 = R+ wt+1 holds for every i ∈ [m], U ⊆ [p],
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
where R+ denotes the |U|×|f(U)| matrix obtained from R+ by restricting its column indices to the
iU,f(U) iU
elements in f(U).
P.2 We can efficiently recover wt+1 from the erroneous vectors {vt+1+e }m , where at most t of e ’s
f(U) iU iU i=1 iU
are non-zero and may have arbitrary entries. Since vt+1 = R+ wt+1 , for every i ∈ [m], U ⊆ [p],
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
this property requires that not only R+, but its sub-matrices also have error correcting capabilities.
Remark 9. Note that P.1 implies that for every i∈[p], we have |f(i)|≤d/p. As we see later, this will be
equal to m/(1+(cid:15)) for some (cid:15)>0 which is determined by the corruption threshold. This means that in each
iteration of the CD algorithm running on the modified encoded problem, we will be effectively updating the
coordinates of the parameter vector w in chunks of size m/(1+(cid:15)) or its integer multiples. In particular, if
eachworkeriupdatesk coordinatesofv , thenkm/(1+(cid:15))coordinatesofw willgetupdated. Forcomparison,
i
Algorithm 1 updates km coordinates of the parameter vector w in each iteration, if each worker updates k
coordinates in that iteration.
17Toseethis,considerthecasewheneachworkeriupdatesonlythefirstcoordinateofvi andnoworkeriscorrupt. Master
receives m linear equations vi1 = R+
i1
w, i = 1,2,...,m, where R+
i1
is the first row of R+
i
for every i ∈ [m]. Assume, for
simplicity, that these m equations are linearly independent. When m is smaller than d (which is always the case), there are
infinite solutions to this system of linear equations, unless at most m elements of w are involved in the m linear equations
(i.e., the number of unknowns are at most the number of equations), which is equivalent to saying that the rows R+ for
i1
i=1,2,...,maresparse. Ourencodingmatrixwillsatisfythisproperty;seeSection5.1formoredetail.
24
M broadcasts w¯¯t
f(U(cid:48))
w¯¯t f(U(cid:48))
M Dec
U(cid:48)) ¯w¯ tf( X L1
W W W W
1 2 3 m
L X L X L X L X
1 2 3 m
e+ tw¯¯X
L
2 )(cid:48)U(f
2
M broadcasts φ(cid:48)(Xwt)
Xwt Compute φ(cid:48)(Xwt)
M Dec
φ(cid:48)(Xwt)
L L 3X w¯ f ¯ (U t mX w¯¯ f t (U(cid:48))+ e m v t + 1 1 U
)(cid:48)
W W W W
1 2 3 m
XR XR XR XR
1 2 3 m
1+tv U2
t ← t+1; U(cid:48) ← U; w¯¯t := wt−1 −wt
f(U(cid:48)) f(U(cid:48)) f(U(cid:48))
wt+1 f(U)
v 3 U t+ 1 v m t U +1 + e + m e U
3 U
Figure 2 This figure shows our 2-round approach to the Byzantine-resilient distributed coordinate descent (CD) for solving
(15)usingdataencodingandreal-errorcorrection. WeencodeXwiththeencodingmatrix[R1 ... Rm]∈Rd×p2m andstore
X(cid:101)R
i
:= XRi at the i’th worker and solve (16) over an enlarged parameter vector v ∈ Rp2m. At the t’th iteration, for some
U ⊆[p2], the update at thei’th workeris v
i
t
U
+1 =v
i
t
U
−αtRT
iU
XTφ(cid:48)(X(cid:101)Rvt), whichrequires φ(cid:48)(X(cid:101)Rvt), where X(cid:101)Rvt =Xwt.
Thefirstpartofthefigureisforprovidingφ(cid:48)(Xwt)toeveryworkerineachiterationsothattheycanupdatevt ’s. Forthis,
iU
we encode X using the encoding matrix [LT
1
... LT
m
]T ∈Rp1m×n and store X(cid:101)L
i
:=LiX at worker i. The encoding has the
property that we can recover Xwt from the erroneous vectors {X(cid:101)L
i
wt+ei}m
i=1
, where at most t of the ei’s are non-zero and
canbearbitrary. Wecanmakeitcomputationallymoreefficientattheworkers’sidebyobservingthat,ineachiteration,only
asubsetofcoordinatesofwarebeingupdated: supposeweupdatedvt ’sinthet’thiteration,whichautomaticallyupdated
iU(cid:48)
wt . Since wt remain unchanged, we need to send only wt to the workers – in the figure, to take care of a
f(U(cid:48)) [d]\f(U(cid:48)) f(U(cid:48))
technicality,weletmasterbroadcastw¯¯
f
t
(U(cid:48))
:=w
f
t−
(U
1
(cid:48))
−w
f
t
(U(cid:48))
,eachworkericomputesX(cid:101)iw¯¯
f
t
(U(cid:48))
andsendsitbackstothe
master. Since master keeps Xwt−1 from the previous iteration with itself, it can compute Xwt. The set of corrupt workers
maybedifferentindifferentrounds–thecorruptonesareshowninredcolorandtheycansendarbitraryoutcomestomaster.
OncemasterhasrecoveredXwt,itcomputesφ(cid:48)(Xwt)andbroadcastsit;uponreceivingitworkeriupdatesvt+1 andsendsit
iU
back. ByP.1,thisreflectsanupdateonwt+1 accordingto(19);andbyP.2,themastercanrecoverwt+1 .
f(U) f(U)
Now we design an encoding matrix R+ and a decoding method that satisfy P.1 and P.2.
5.1 Encoding and Decoding
In this section, we first design an encoding matrix R+ that satisfies P.1. R+ will be such that it has
orthonormalrows, so, Riseasytocompute, R=(R+)T. Forsimplicity, wedenoteR+ byS. Weshowthat
the encoding matrix that we design for the MV multiplication in Section 4 satisfies all the properties that
we want.18 In the MV multiplication, we had a fixed matrix A and the master node wants to compute Aw
for any vector w of its choice. In the solution presented in Section 4, we encode A and store S A at the i’th
i
workernode. Now, themastersendsw toalltheworkernodes, andeachworkerirespondswithS Aw+e ,
i i
where e =0 if worker i is honest, otherwise can be arbitrary. Once master receives {S Aw+e }m , it can
i i i i=1
runthe error correctingproceduretorecoverAw. To applythisinour setting, wetake A tobetheidentity
matrix, such that S A=S , and the master can recover w from {r =S w+e }m , if at most t of the e ’s
i i i i i i=1 i
are non-zero. For convenience, we rewrite the encoding matrix S for the i’th worker node from Section 4.2
i
18TheencodinganddecodingofthissectionisbasedonthecorrespondingalgorithmsfromSection4.
25
below:
b ...b 
1i qi
S i =

 
... 
  (20)
 
b ...b
 1i qi 
b ...b
1i li p×d
Here q = (m−2t) and l = d−(p−1)q, where p = (cid:100)d(cid:101). Note that 1 ≤ l < q, and if q divides d, then
q
l=q. AlltheunspecifiedentriesofS arezero. BystackinguptheS ’sgivesusourdesiredencodingmatrix
i i
S=[ST ST ... ST]T. Notethatb ,b ,...,b aresuchthatifweletb =[b b ...b ]T foreveryi∈[q],
1 2 m 1i 2i qi i i1 i2 im
then {b ,b ,...,b } is a set of orthonormal vectors. This implies that S is orthonormal, and, therefore,
1 2 q
S+ =ST. By taking R=ST, we have R+ =S. Now we show that S satisfies P.1-P.2.
Our Encoding Satisfies P.1. We need to show a map f : [p] → P([d]) that satisfies P.1. Let us define
the function f as follows, where (q =m−2t) and p=(cid:100)d(cid:101):
q
(cid:40) [(i−1)∗q+1:i∗q] if 1≤i<p,
f(i):= (21)
[(p−1)∗q+1:d] if i=p,
and for any U ⊆ [p], we define f(U) := ∪ f(i). It is clear from the definition of f that (i) {f(i) : i ∈ [p]}
i∈U
partitions [d]; (ii) for every i ∈ [p−1] we have |f(i)| = q, and that |f(p)| ≤ q. Recall that q = m−2t. For
the 3rd property, note that, for any U ⊆ [p], all the columns of S whose indices belong to [d]\f(U) are
iU
identically zero, which implies that we have
S w=S w , for every w∈Rd, (22)
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
which in turn implies that
S XT =S XT . (23)
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
Since S+ = ST, we have S+ = ST for every i ∈ [m] and every U ⊆ [p]. With these, our update rule
iU iU
vt+1 =S wt−α S XTφ(cid:48)(Xwt)19 can equivalently be written as
iU iU t iU
vt+1 =S wt+1 , (24)
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
where
wt+1 =wt −α XT φ(cid:48)(Xwt). (25)
f(U) f(U) t f(U)
Observethat(25)isthesameupdateruleas(19), whichimpliesthatifeachworkeriupdatesv according
iU
to the CD update rule, then the collective update at all the worker nodes automatically updates w
f(U)
according the CD update rule. Now we show that our invariant vt+1 =Swt+1 is maintained. We show this
by induction. Base case v0 = Sw0 holds by construction. For the inductive case, assume that vt = Swt
holds at time t and we show vt+1 =Swt+1 holds at time t+1.
Define U :=[p]\U and f(U):=[d]\f(U). Since we did not update vt ’s, we have vt+1 =vt for every
iU iU iU
i∈[m]. This, together with the inductive hypothesis (i.e., vt =Swt), implies that
vt+1 =S wt. (26)
iU iU
19We emphasize that we used S+ =ST crucially to equivalently write our update rule vt+1 =R+wt−αRT XTφ(cid:48)(Xwt)
iU iU iU
from (18) as v
i
t
U
+1 =SiUwt−αtSiUXTφ(cid:48)(Xwt). This follows because S+ =ST and we take R+ =S, which together imply
thatR+
iU
=RT
iU
=SiU.
26
Since f(U)=f(U), we have from (22) that
S wt =S wt . (27)
iU iU,f(U) f(U)
It is clear from (25) that wt did not get an update when we updated vt ’s, which implies that wt+1 =
f(U) iU f(U)
wt . Substituting this in (27) gives S wt = S wt+1 , which, by (22), yields S wt = S wt+1.
f(U) iU iU,f(U) f(U) iU iU
This, together with (26), implies
vt+1 =S wt+1. (28)
iU iU
We already have from (22) and (24) that
vt+1 =S wt+1. (29)
iU iU
Since (28) and (29) hold for every i∈[m], we have vt+1 =Swt+1. Hence, the invariant is maintained.
Our Encoding Satisfies P.2. If we let
v :=[vT vT ...vT ]T,
[m]U 1U 2U mU
S :=[ST ST ...ST ]T,
[m]U,f(U) 1U,f(U) 2U,f(U) mU,f(U)
then the collective update (24) from all the workers can be written as
vt+1 =S wt+1 . (30)
[m]U [m]U,f(U) f(U)
It is easy to verify that for every choice of U ⊆[p], S is a full column-rank matrix, which implies
[m]U,f(U)
that we can in principle recover the updated wt+1 from vt+1 = S wt+1 . Now we show that not
f(U) [m]U [m]U,f(U) f(U)
only can we recover wt+1 from {S wt+1 }m , but also efficiently recover wt+1 from the erroneous
f(U) iU,f(U) f(U) i=1 f(U)
vectors {S wt+1 +e }m , where at most t out of m error vectors {e }m are non-zero and may
iU,f(U) f(U) iU i=1 iU i=1
have arbitrary entries. Let U ={j ,j ,...,j }, and for every i∈[m], let e =[e e ...e ]T. Master
1 2 |U| iU ij1 ij2 ij|U|
equivalently writes {S wt+1 +e }m as |U| systems of linear equations.
iU,f(U) f(U) iU i=1
h˜ (wt+1 )=S˜ wt+1 +e˜ , i∈U, (31)
i f(U) i,f(U) f(U) i
where, for every i ∈ U, e˜ = [e ,e ,...,e ]T and S˜ is an m×|f(U)| matrix whose j’th row is equal
i 1i 2i mi i,f(U)
to the i’th row of S , for every j ∈[m]. Note that at most t entries in each e˜ are non-zero. Observe that
jU i
{S wt+1 +e }m and {S˜ wt+1 +e˜ } are equivalent systems of linear equations, and we can
iU,f(U) f(U) iU i=1 i,f(U) f(U) i i∈U
get one from the other. Observe that (31) is similar to (8): S˜ is equal to S˜ (for the same i) with some
i,f(U) i
of its zero columns removed; and adding zero columns to S˜ will not change the value of h˜ (wt+1 ).
i,f(U) i f(U)
Now, using the machinery developed in Section 4 we can recover wt+1 from (31) in O(|U|m2) time.
f(U)
5.2 Resource Requirement Analysis
In this section, first we give our algorithm developed for distributed coordinate descent in the presence of t
(out of m) adversarial worker nodes, whose pictorial description is given in Figure 2.
We use two encoding matrices L ∈ R(p1m)×n and R ∈ Rd×(p2m). Let L = [LT LT ... LT]T and
1 2 m
R = [R R ... R ], where each L is a p ×n matrix with p = (cid:100) n (cid:101) and each R is a d×p matrix
1 2 m i 1 1 m−2t i 2
with p
2
= (cid:100)
m−
d
2t
(cid:101). Worker i stores both X(cid:101)L
i
= L
i
X and X(cid:101)R
i
= XR
i
. Roughly, L is used to recover Xw
from the erroneous {L Xw+e }m , and R is used to update the parameter vector reliably despite errors.
i i i=1
Here L is a full column-rank matrix and R is a full row-rank matrix. Initialize with an arbitrary w0 and let
v0 =R+w0. Repeat the following until convergence:
27
1. At iteration t, master sends (wt−1 −wt )20 to all the workers (at t = 0, master sends w ), where
f(U) f(U) 0
U ⊆ [p ] is the set of indices used for updating vt−1’s in the previous iteration, which in turn updated
2 iU
wt−1 ; see (24) and (25) in Section 5.1.
f(U)
2. WorkericomputesX(cid:101)L
i
(w
f
t−
(U
1
)
−w
f
t
(U)
)=L
i
X(w
f
t−
(U
1
)
−w
f
t
(U)
)andsendsittothemaster.21 Uponreceiving
{X(cid:101)L
i
(w
f
t−
(U
1
)
−w
f
t
(U)
)+e
i
}m
i=1
, where at most t of the e
i
’s are non-zero and may have arbitrary entries,
the master applies the decoding procedure of Section 4 and recovers X(wt−1 − wt ). We assume
f(U) f(U)
that master keeps Xwt−1 from the previous iteration (which is equal to 0 if t = 0), it can compute
Xwt =Xwt−1−X(wt−1 −wt ). Note that if t=0, this is equal to Xw0.
f(U) f(U)
3. After obtaining Xwt, master computes φ(cid:48)(Xwt), picks a subset U ⊆ [p ] (randomly or in a round robin
2
fashion to cover [p ] in a few iterations), and sends (φ(cid:48)(Xwt),U) to all the workers.
2
4. Each worker node i ∈ [m] updates v
i
t
U
+1 ← v
i
t
U
−α
t
∇
iU
φ(X(cid:101)vt) = v
i
t
U
−α
t
(X(cid:101)R
iU
)Tφ(cid:48)(Xwt), while keep-
ing the other coordinates of vt unchanged. Worker i sends vt+1 to the master. Note that vt+1 =
i iU iU
R+ wt+1 , where wt+1 =[wt −αXT φ(cid:48)(Xwt)]; see (24) and (25) in Section 5.1.
iU,f(U) f(U) f(U) f(U) f(U)
5. Upon receiving {vt+1+e }m , where at most t of the {e }m ’s are non-zero and may have arbitrary
iU iU i=1 iU i=1
entries, master applies the decoding procedure (since our encoding satisfies P.2) and recovers wt+1 .
f(U)
Now we analyze the total amount of resources (storage, computation, and communication) required by
the above algorithm and prove Theorem 2. Fix an (cid:15) > 0. Let the corruption threshold t satisfy t ≤
(cid:98)((cid:15)/(1+(cid:15)))·(m/2)(cid:99).
5.2.1 Storage Requirement:
By a similar analysis done in Section 4.5, we can show that the total storage at all worker nodes is roughly
equal to 2(1+(cid:15))|X|.
5.2.2 Computational Complexity:
We can divide the computational complexity of our scheme as follows:
• Encoding the data matrix. By a similar analysis done in Section 4.5, we can show that the total encoding
(cid:16) (cid:17)
time is O ( (cid:15) m+1)nd . Note that this encoding is to be done only once.
1+(cid:15)
• Computation at each worker node. Supposethatineachiterationofouralgorithm,alltheworkersupdate
τ coordinates of v ’s. Fix an iteration t and assume that at iteration (t − 1), workers updated the
i
coordinates in the set U ⊆[p ], where |U|=τ. Recall from P.1 that updating τ =|U| coordinates of each
2
vt−1 automatically updates wt−1 . Upon receiving (wt−1 −wt ) from the master node, each worker
i f(U) f(U) f(U)
i computes X(cid:101)L(wt−1 −wt ), and reports back the resulting vector. Note that (wt−1 −wt ) has
i f(U) f(U) f(U) f(U)
at most |f(U)| =
1
τ
+
m
(cid:15)
non-zero elements, which together with that X(cid:101)L
i
is a p
1
×d matrix, implies that
computing X(cid:101)L
i
(w
f
t−
(U
1
)
−w
f
t
(U)
) takes O(p
1
·|f(U)|)=O(nτ) time.22 In the second round, given φ(cid:48)(Xwt),
since (X(cid:101)R )T is of dimension n×τ, updating vt requires O(nτ) time, where τ =|U|. So, the total time
iU iU
taken by each worker is O(nτ).
20Observe that master need not send the locations f(U), because workers can compute those by themselves, as they know
bothU andthefunctionf.
21Withsomeabuseofnotation,whenwewriteXw ,weimplicitlyassumethatw isalengthdvector,whichhas0’s
f(U) f(U)
intheindicesthatlieinf(U).
22Note that in the very first iteration, master sends w0, which may be a dense length d vector, and computing X(cid:101)iLw0 at
thei’thworkercantakeO(p1d)=O((1+(cid:15))n
m
d)time. Thisisonlyforthefirstiteration.
28
• Computation at the master node. Once master receives {L X(wt−1 − wt ) + e }m , applying the
i f(U) f(U) i i=1
decoding procedure of Section 4 to obtain X(wt−1 − wt ) from these erroneous vectors requires
f(U) f(U)
O(p m2)=O((1+(cid:15))nm) time. After that obtaining Xwt takes another O(n) time. Given Xwt, comput-
1
ing φ(cid:48)(Xwt) takes O(n) time, assuming that computing (cid:96)(cid:48)((cid:104)x ,wt(cid:105);y ) requires unit time, where (cid:104)x ,wt(cid:105)
i i i
is equal to the i’th entry of Xwt. Upon receiving {vt+1 +e }m , where vt+1 = R+ wt+1 , for
iU iU i=1 iU iU,f(U) f(U)
all i ∈ [m], recovering wt+1 requires O(τm2) time. So, the total time taken by the master node is
f(U)
O((1+(cid:15))nm+τm2).
5.2.3 Communication Complexity:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Suppose workers update τ coordinates of v ’s in each iteration. Then (i) master broadcasts τm +n real
i 1+(cid:15)
numbers, τm in the first round to represent wt and n in the second round to represent φ(cid:48)(Xwt); and
1+(cid:15) f(U)
(ii) each worker sends (cid:0) τ +(1+(cid:15))n(cid:1) real numbers, (1+(cid:15))n in the first round for computing Xwt at the
m m
master node and τ in the second iteration to represent vt .
iU
6 Extensions
Inthissection,wegiveafewimportantextensionsofourcodingschemedevelopedearlierinSection4. First
we give a Byzantine-resilient and communication-efficient method for stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Second we show how to exploit the specific structure of our encoding matrix to efficiently extend our coding
technique to the streaming data model. In the end, we give a few more important applications, where our
method can be applied constructively.
6.1 Stochastic Gradient Descent
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [HM51] is another alternative if full gradients are too costly to compute.
In each iteration of SGD, we sample a data point uniformly at random, compute a gradient on that sample,
and update the parameter vector based on that. We start with an arbitrary/random parameter vector
w ∈Rd and update it according the following update rule:
0
w =w −α ∇f (w ), t=1,2,3,... (32)
t+1 t t rt t
where r is sampled uniformly at random from {1,2,...,n}. This ensures that the expected value of the
t
gradientisequaltothetruegradient. Duetoitssimplicityandremarkableempiricalperformance, SGDhas
become arguably the most widely-used optimization algorithm in many large-scale applications, especially
in deep learning [Bot10,RSS12,DCM+12]. We want to run SGD in a distributed setup, where data is
distributed among m worker nodes and at most t of them can be corrupt; see Section 2.3 for details on our
adversary model.
Our solution. In the plain SGD, we sample a data point randomly and compute its gradient. So, we
give a method in which, at any iteration t, master picks a random number r in {1,2,...,n}, broadcasts it,
t
and recovers the r ’th data point x . Once the master has obtained x , it can compute a gradient on it
t rt rt
and updates the parameter vector. Since master recovers the data points, we can optimize for non-convex
problems also; essentially, we could optimize anything that the plain SGD can. Our method is described
below.
We encode XT using the (cid:100)d/(m−2t)(cid:101)×d encoding matrix S(2), which has been defined in Section 4.5.
For simplicity, we denote S(2) by S. Let S=[ST ST ... ST]T. Note that the j’th worker stores S XT. Let
1 2 m j
X(cid:101) :=SXT, whichisa(cid:100)d/(m−2t)(cid:101)×nmatrix, whosei’thcolumnistheencodingx
(cid:101)i
:=Sx
i
ofthei’thdata
point x . Using the method developed in Section 4, given {S x +e }m , where e =0 if the j’th worker is
i j i j j=1 j
honest, otherwise can be arbitrary, master can recover x exactly in O((1+(cid:15))md) time. Our main theorem
i
is stated below, a proof of which trivially follows from Section 4.
29
Theorem 3 (Stochastic Gradient Descent). Let X∈Rn×d denote the data matrix. Let m denote the total
number of worker nodes. We can compute a stochastic gradient in a distributed manner in the presence of t
corrupt worker nodes and s stragglers, with the following guarantees, where (cid:15)>0 is a free parameter.
(cid:106) (cid:107)
• (s+t)≤ (cid:15) · m .
1+(cid:15) 2
• Total storage requirement is roughly (1+(cid:15))|X|.
• Computational complexity for each stochastic gradient computation:
– at each worker node is O((1+(cid:15))d).
m
– at the master node is O((1+(cid:15))dm).
• Communication complexity for each stochastic gradient computation:
– each worker sends
(cid:0) (1+(cid:15))d(cid:1)
real numbers.
m
– master broadcasts (cid:100)logn(cid:101) bits.
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
• Total encoding time is O nd (cid:15) m+1 .
1+(cid:15)
Observe the distributed gain of our method in the communication exchanged between the workers and
the master: (i) master only broadcasts an index in {1,2,...,n}, which only takes (cid:100)logn(cid:101) bits; and (ii) each
worker sends roughly 1+(cid:15) fraction of the total dimension d. Hence, this method is particularly useful in
m
distributed settings with communication-constrained and band-limited links. The Remarks 2, 4, 5 are also
applicable for Theorem 3.
Remark 10 (One-round vs. two-round approach). Unlike the two-round approach taken for gradient com-
putation in PGD and also for CD, we give a one-round approach for each iteration of SGD. This is because
in each SGD iteration we need to compute the gradient on only one data point (not the entire dataset, as in
the case for each PGD iteration). Because of this, recovering a (random) data-point itself at the master and
then computing a gradient on it locally (which is what we do) would be far more efficient than computing
gradient on a single data point in a distributed manner. This is in contrast to each gradient computation
for PGD, which requires computation of the full gradient (which is the summation of gradients on all n data
points). In principle, we can use the one-round for each PGD iteration also in which first we recover all the
n data points at master and then compute the full gradient locally, but this approach would defeat the purpose
of distributed computation both in terms of storage and computational complexity. Note that our two-round
approach for PGD is significantly more efficient than this.
The reason behind taking the two-round approach for CD is because in order to update the local parameter
vectors in the t’th iteration, workers need access to the MV multiplication X(cid:101)Rvt =Xwt (see the paragraph
after (18) for more details), and in order to provide that we use an extra round – the first round is used for
computing Xw and the second round is used for updating the local parameter vectors. Again, for CD also,
we could adopt a one-round approach where master recovers all the n data points and then do the parameter
update, but that would be highly inefficient and defeat the purpose of distributed computation.
One of the main advantages of the one-round approach for SGD is that since we are recovering the data
point itself at the master, we can use it to optimize any function, both convex and non-convex. This is in
contrast to the two-round approach, which can only be used for generalized linear models only.
6.2 Encoding in The Streaming Data Model
An attractive property of our encoding scheme is that it is very easy to update with new data points. More
specifically, our encoding requires the same amount of time, irrespective of whether we get all the data at
once, or we get each sample point one by one, as in the online/streaming model. This setting encompasses
a more realistic scenario, in which we design our coding scheme with the initial set of data points and
30
distribute the encoded data among the workers. Later on, when we get some more samples, we can easily
incorporate them into our existing encoded data. We show that updating (m−2t) new data points in Rd
requires O((m−2t)((2t+1)d)) time in total, i.e., O((2t+1)d) amortized-time per data point. This is the
best one can hope for, since the offline encoding of n data points requires O((2t+1)nd) total time. At the
end of the update, the final encoded matrix that we get is the same as the one we would have got had we
had all the n+1 data points in the beginning. Therefore, the decoding is not affected by this method at
all. Note that we use the same encoding matrices both for gradient computation as well as for coordinate
descent. So, it suffices to prove our result in the streaming model for any one of them, and we show it for
gradient computation below.
Theorem 4. The total time complexity in encoding all the data points at once, i.e., when encoding is done
offline, is the same as the total time complexity in encoding the data points one by one as they come in the
streaming model, i.e., when encoding is done online.
Proof. LetS(1) andS(2) denotetheencodingmatricesforencodingXandXT, respectively; seeSection4.2.
For convenience, we copy over the corresponding encoding matrices S(1) and S(2) from (11) for the i’th
i i
worker node in Figure 3.
b ...b 
1i qi
S(1) =

 
... 
 
i  
b ...b
 1i qi 
b ...b
1i l1i p1×n
(a)
b ...b 
1i qi
S(2) =

 
... 
 
i  
b ...b
 1i qi 
b ...b
1i l2i p2×d
(b)
Figure3Figure3adepictstheencodingmatrixforthei’thworkernodeforencodingX,whichisusedinthefirstroundofthe
gradientcomputation. Herep1=(cid:100)n/q(cid:101),whereq=(m−k)andk isequaltothenumberofrowsintheerrorrecoverymatrix
F in (14), and l1 =n−(p1−1)q. Figure 3b depicts the encoding matrix for the i’th worker node for encoding XT, which is
usedinthesecondroundofthegradientcomputation. Herep2 =(cid:100)d/q(cid:101)andl2 =d−(p2−1)q. Alltheunspecifiedentriesin
boththematricesarezero.
Suppose at some point of time we have encoded n data points each lying in Rd and distributed the
encoded data among the m worker nodes. Now a new data sample x ∈ Rd comes in. We will show how to
incorporate it in the existing scheme in O((2t+1)d) time on average.
Updating the encoding matrices. Fix an arbitrary worker i ∈ [m]. Note that the new data matrix X
has dimension (n+1)×d. So, the new encoding matrix S(1) should have (n+1) columns, and we have to
i
add one more column to S(1). By examining the repetitive structure of S(1), it is obvious which column to
i i
add: if l <q, then we add the p -dimensional vector [0,0,...,0,b ]T as the last column; otherwise, if
1 1 (l1+1)i
l =q, then we add the (p +1)-dimensional vector [0,0,...,0,b ]T as the last column. In the second case,
1 1 1i
the number of rows of S(1) increases by one – the last row has all zeros, except for the last element, which
i
is equal to b . Note that S(2) does not change at all. Observe that if the i’th worker performs this update,
1i i
then it does not have to store its entire encoding matrix S(1), it only needs to store n, q =(m−k), and the
i
31
q real numbers b ,b ,...,b , where q =m−k, which could be much smaller as compared to n and d, and
1i 2i qi
are enough to define S(1) and S(2).
i i
Updating the encoded data. Now we show how to update the encoded data with the new sample x.
We need to update both S(1)X as well as S(2)XT for every worker i∈[m].
i i
• Updating S(1)X. If l < q, then we add b xT to the last row of S(1)X; otherwise, if l = q, then
i 1 (l1+1)i i 1
we add b x as a new row in S(1)X. In the first case, the resulting matrix still has p rows, whose
1i i 1
first p −1 rows are same as before, and the last row is the sum of the previous row and b xT.
1 (l1+1)i
In the second case, the resulting matrix has (p +1) rows, whose first p rows are the same as before
1 1
and the last row is equal to b xT. Note that each row of S(1) for i ≤ 2t, has at most (m−2t) non-
1i i
zero elements; whereas, for i > 2t, each row of S(1) has exactly one non-zero entry. Since there are
i
p = (cid:100)n/(m−2t)(cid:101) rows in each S(1), updating S(1)X for every i ≤ 2t takes O(d) time; and for i > 2t,
1 i i
update in S(1)X happens only once in (m−2t) new data points (whenever the second case occurs and
i
the resulting S(1) has (p +1) rows). So, updating (m−2t) data points at all m worker nodes require
i 1
O(2t∗(m−2t)d+(m−2t)∗d)=O((m−2t)(2t+1)d) time, i.e., O((2t+1)d) time per data point.
• Updating S(2)XT. NotethatXT isad×(n+1)matrixwhoselastcolumnisequaltothenewdatasample
i
x. Now, to update S(2)XT, we add S(2)x as an extra column. The resulting matrix is of size p ×(n+1),
i i 2
whose first n columns are the same as before and the last column is equal to S(2)x. Since total number
i
of non-zero entries in S(2) is equal to d if i ≤ 2t and equal to p = (cid:100)d/(m−2t)(cid:101) if i > 2t, the total time
i 2
required to update a new data point is O(2t∗d+(m−2t)∗p )=O((2t+1)d).
2
Observe that at the end of this local update at each worker node, the final encoded matrix that we get is
the same as the one we would have got had we had all the n+1 data points in the beginning. The decoding
is not affected by this method at all. This completes the proof of Theorem 4.
Remark 11 (Updating the encoded data efficiently with new features). Observe that since we encode both
X and XT in an analogous fashion, it follows by symmetry that we can not only update efficiently upon
receiving a new data sample, but can also update efficiently if we decide to enlarge the dimension d of each of
the n data samples at some point of time – maybe we figure out some new features of the data to get a more
accurate model to overcome under-fitting. In these situations, we don’t need to encode the entire dataset all
over again, just a simple update is enough to incorporate the changes.
Remark 12 (Whatallowsourencodingtobeefficientforstreamingdata?). The efficient update property of
our coding scheme is made possible by the repetitive structure of our encoding matrix (see Figure 3), together
with the fact that this structure is independent of the number of data points n and the dimension d – it
only depends on the number of worker nodes m and the corruption threshold t. We remark that other data
encoding methods in literature, even for weaker models, do not support efficient update. For example, the
encoding of [KSDY17], which was designed for mitigating stragglers, depends on the dimensions n and d of
the data matrix. So, it may not efficiently update if a new data point comes in.
6.3 More Applications.
Therearemanyiterativealgorithms,otherthanthegradientdescentforlearningGLMs,whichuserepeated
MV multiplication. Some of them include (i) the power method for computing the largest eigenvalue of a
diagonalizable matrix, which is used in Google’s PageRank algorithm [ISW06], Twitter’s recommendation
system[GGL+13],etc.;(ii)iterativemethodsforsolvingsparselinearsystems[Saa03];(iii)manygraphalgo-
rithms,wherethegraphisrepresentedbyafixedadjacencymatrix,[KG11]. Inlarge-scaleimplementationof
these systems, where Byzantine faults are inevitable, the method described in this paper can be of interest.
32
In most of these applications, the underlying matrix A is generally sparse, which is exploited to gain
computational efficiency. So, it is desired not to lose sparsity even if we want resiliency against Byzantine
attacks. Fortunately, our encoding matrix S is sparse (see (11)), which ensures that the encoded matrix SA
will not lose the sparsity of A: Each of the first pk rows of S has at most (m−k) (where k =2t) non-zero
elements, and each of the remaining rows has exactly one 1. Since m is the number of worker nodes, which
may be small, and we can take t to be up to (cid:98)m−1(cid:99), we may have a few non-zero entries in each row of
2
S (in the extreme case when 2t = m−1, each row of S has only one non-zero entry). In a sense, we are
gettingByzantine-resiliencyalmostforfreewithoutcompromisingthecomputationalefficiencythatismade
possible by the sparsity of the matrix.
7 Numerical Experiments
In this section, we validate the efficacy of our proposed methods by numerical experiments. We run dis-
tributedgradientdescent(GD)andcoordinatedescent(CD)forlinearregressionargmin (cid:107)Xw−y(cid:107)2. As
w∈Rd 2
mentioned in Section 2.1, for linear regression (which is equal to ridge regression when h=0), the projected
gradientdescent(PGD)reducestogradientdescent(GD).Sincewearedoingexactcomputation(computing
the gradients exactly in the case of GD and updating the coordinates exactly in the case of CD), (i) there
is no need to check the convergence, and (ii) our algorithm will perform exactly the same whether we are
workingwithsyntheticdatasetsorrealdatasets,hence,wewillworkwithasyntheticdataset. Werunoural-
gorithms23 withm=15workernodesontwodatasets: (n=10,000,d=250)and(n=20,000,d=22,000).
For both the datasets, we generate (X,y) by sampling X ← N(0,I) and y = Xθ+z, where θ ∈ Rd has
d/3 non-zero entries, all of them are i.i.d. according to N(0,4), and each entry of z ∈ Rn is sampled from
N(0,1) i.i.d. In each round of the gradient computation, the adversary picks t worker nodes uniformly at
random, and adds independent random vectors of appropriate length as errors, whose entries are sampled
from N(0,σ2) i.i.d. with σ =100, to the true vectors.
Figure4Werunouralgorithms(CDandGD)with15workernodesonadatasetwithn=10,000,d=250. Thisplotreports
howthetotaltimetaken(inseconds)forupdatingdifferentnumberofcoordinatesineachCDiterationchangeswithvarying
number of corrupt worker nodes from t=1 to t=7. In the figure, we plot the total time taken (per iteration) for updating
theγ-fractionofdcoordinatesforγ =0.1,0.25,0.5,1. NotethatCDwithγ =1isequivalenttofullgradientcomputationas
inGD.
23WeimplementouralgorithminPython, andrunitonaniMacmachinewith3.8GHzQuad-CoreIntelCorei5processor
and16GB2400MHzDDR4memory.
33
CD(0.1d) CD(0.25d) CD(0.5d) GD ≡ CD(d)
Worker Master Worker Master Worker Master Worker Master
t=1 0.0020 0.0120 0.0073 0.0182 0.0122 0.0199 0.0493 0.0214
t=2 0.0044 0.0187 0.0092 0.0212 0.0188 0.0277 0.0953 0.0393
t=3 0.0054 0.0201 0.0118 0.0242 0.0269 0.0324 0.1213 0.0561
t=4 0.0063 0.0253 0.0159 0.0327 0.0488 0.0468 0.1602 0.0610
t=5 0.0107 0.0342 0.0328 0.0460 0.0776 0.0738 0.2943 0.0826
t=6 0.0205 0.0717 0.0764 0.0833 0.1330 0.1088 0.8929 0.1227
Figure5Werunouralgorithms(CDandGD)with15workernodesonadatasetwithn=20,000,d=22,000,andseparately
report the maximum time taken by any single worker and the master per iteration against varying number of corrupt worker
nodes from t = 1 to 6. For CD, we run our algorithm for updating different number of coordinates. The first two columns
correspondtothecasewhenupdating0.1-fractionofdcoordinates,thenexttwocolumnsfor0.25-fraction,andsoon. Thelast
twocolumnscorrespondtoupdatingallthecoordinates,whichisequivalenttofullgradientcomputationasinGD.
7.1 n = 10,000,d = 250,m = 15
InFigure4, weplotthetotaltimetaken(whichisthesumofthemaximumtimetakenbyanysingleworker
node and the time taken by the master node in both rounds) for updating different number of coordinates
in one CD iteration, with varying number of corrupt worker nodes from t = 1 to t = 7. We plot the time
neededforupdatingγ-fractionofdcoordinatesforfourdifferentvaluesofγ (i.e.,γ =0.1,0.25,0.5,1)andwe
denote it by CD(γd) for γ =0.1,0.25,0.5,1. Recall that CD(d) is equivalent to full gradient computation as
in the case of GD. Note that, when t=7, we have (cid:15)=m−1, which is the main cause behind the significant
increment in time for t=7.
7.2 n = 20,000,d = 22,000,m = 15
In Figure 5, we report separately, the maximum time taken by any single worker node and the time taken
by the master node (together in both the rounds) in one CD iteration for updating different number of
coordinates and also for GD, with varying number of corrupt worker nodes from t = 1 to t = 6. As in the
above case, we report the time needed for updating γ-fraction of d coordinates for four different values of
γ. Observe that the time taken by the master node is orders of magnitude less than the time taken by the
worker nodes. We can also observe that with the running time in a worker node per iteration for CD(0.1d)
is 95% less than that for GD, while this time saving in the master node is more than 40%.
Acknowledgements
The work of Deepesh Data and Suhas Diggavi was partially supported by the Army Research Laboratory
under Cooperative Agreement W911NF-17-2-0196, by the UC-NL grant LFR-18-548554, and by the NSF
award 1740047. The work of Linqi Song was partially supported by the NSF awards 1527550, 1514531,
by the City University of Hong Kong grant 7200594, and by the Hong Kong RGC ECS 21212419. The
views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the
U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation here on.
References
[A+18] Tarek F. Abdelzaher et al. Will distributed computing revolutionize peace? the emergence of
battlefield iot. In ICDCS 2018, pages 1129–1138, 2018.
34
[AAL18] Dan Alistarh, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, and Jerry Li. Byzantine stochastic gradient descent. In Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 4618–4628, 2018.
[AT08] Mehmet Akçakaya and Vahid Tarokh. A frame construction and a universal distortion bound
for sparse representations. IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, 56(6):2443–2450, 2008.
[Bil95] P. Billingsley. Probability and Measure. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. Wiley, 1995.
[BKBG11] Joseph K. Bradley, Aapo Kyrola, Danny Bickson, and Carlos Guestrin. Parallel coordinate
descent for l1-regularized loss minimization. In ICML, pages 321–328, 2011.
[BMGS17] Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learn-
ing with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 118–128,
2017.
[Bot10] L. Bottou. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings of
COMPSTAT’2010. Physica-Verlag HD, 2010.
[BT89] Dimitri P. Bertsekas and John N. Tsitsiklis. Parallel and Distributed Computation: Numerical
Methods. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1989.
[BV04] Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY, USA, 2004.
[CDN15] Ronald Cramer, Ivan Damgård, and Jesper Buus Nielsen. Secure Multiparty Computation and
Secret Sharing. Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[CP86] Thomas F. Coleman and Alex Pothen. The null space problem I. complexity. SIAM Journal on
Algebraic Discrete Methods, 7(4):527–537, 1986.
[CP18] Zachary B. Charles and Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos. Gradient coding using the stochastic block
model. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, ISIT 2018, Vail, CO,
USA, June 17-22, 2018, pages 1998–2002, 2018.
[CSX17] Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. Distributed statistical machine learning in adversarial
settings: Byzantine gradient descent. POMACS, 1(2):44:1–44:25, 2017.
[CT05] Emmanuel J. Candès and Terence Tao. Decoding by linear programming. IEEE Trans. Infor-
mation Theory, 51(12):4203–4215, 2005.
[CWCP18] Lingjiao Chen, Hongyi Wang, Zachary B. Charles, and Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos. DRACO:
byzantine-resilientdistributedtrainingviaredundantgradients. InProceedings of the 35th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden,
July 10-15, 2018, pages 902–911, 2018.
[DB13] Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso. The tail at scale. Commun. ACM, 56(2):74–80, February
2013.
[DCG16] Sanghamitra Dutta, Viveck R. Cadambe, and Pulkit Grover. Short-dot: Computing large linear
transforms distributedly using coded short dot products. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016,
December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pages 2092–2100, 2016.
[DCG19] SanghamitraDutta,ViveckR.Cadambe,andPulkitGrover."short-dot": Computinglargelinear
transformsdistributedlyusingcodedshortdotproducts. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,65(10):6171–
6193, 2019.
35
[DCM+12] Jeffrey Dean, Greg Corrado, Rajat Monga, Kai Chen, Matthieu Devin, Quoc V. Le, Mark Z.
Mao, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Andrew W. Senior, Paul A. Tucker, Ke Yang, and Andrew Y. Ng.
Large scale distributed deep networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), pages 1232–1240, 2012.
[DD19] DeepeshDataandSuhasN.Diggavi. Byzantine-tolerantdistributedcoordinatedescent. InIEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 2724–2728, 2019.
[DD20a] Deepesh Data and Suhas N. Diggavi. Byzantine-resilient high-dimensional SGD with local iter-
ations on heterogeneous data. CoRR, abs/2006.13041, 2020.
[DD20b] Deepesh Data and Suhas N. Diggavi. Byzantine-resilient SGD in high dimensions on heteroge-
neous data. CoRR, abs/2005.07866, 2020.
[DG08] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. Mapreduce: Simplified data processing on large clusters.
Commun. ACM, 51(1):107–113, January 2008.
[DSD18] Deepesh Data, Linqi Song, and Suhas N. Diggavi. Data encoding for byzantine-resilient dis-
tributed gradient descent. In Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing,
Allerton 2018, pages 863–870, 2018.
[DSD19] DeepeshData,LinqiSong,andSuhasN.Diggavi. Dataencodingmethodsforbyzantine-resilient
distributed optimization. In IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT),
pages 2719–2723, 2019.
[GGL+13] Pankaj Gupta, Ashish Goel, Jimmy Lin, Aneesh Sharma, Dong Wang, and Reza Zadeh. Wtf:
The who to follow service at twitter. In Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on
World Wide Web, WWW ’13, pages 505–514, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[GHYR19] Avishek Ghosh, Justin Hong, Dong Yin, and Kannan Ramchandran. Robust federated learning
in a heterogeneous environment. CoRR, abs/1906.06629, 2019.
[GV19] Nirupam Gupta and Nitin H. Vaidya. Byzantine fault-tolerant parallelized stochastic gradient
descent for linear regression. In 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control,
and Computing, Allerton 2019, Monticello, IL, USA, September 24-27, 2019, pages 415–420.
IEEE, 2019.
[HK71] KennethMHoffmanandRayKunze. Linear algebra. Prentice-Hall, EnglewoodCliffs, NJ,1971.
[HKJ20] LieHe,SaiPraneethKarimireddy,andMartinJaggi.Byzantine-robustlearningonheterogeneous
datasets via resampling. CoRR, abs/2006.09365, 2020.
[HM51] Robbins Herbert and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Math-
ematical Statistics. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/2236626., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 400–407, 1951.
[HRSH18] Wael Halbawi, Navid Azizan Ruhi, Fariborz Salehi, and Babak Hassibi. Improving distributed
gradientdescentusingreed-solomoncodes. In2018 IEEE International Symposium on Informa-
tion Theory, ISIT 2018, Vail, CO, USA, June 17-22, 2018, pages 2027–2031, 2018.
[ISW06] Ilse Ipsen and Rebecca S. Wills. Mathematical properties and analysis of google’s pagerank.
Boletín de la Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada, 34:191–196, 01 2006.
[Jag13] Martin Jaggi. An equivalence between the lasso and support vector machines. CoRR,
abs/1303.1152, 2013.
[KG11] Jeremy Kepner and John Gilbert. Graph Algorithms in the Language of Linear Algebra. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2011.
36
[Kon17] JakubKonecný. Stochastic, Distributed and Federated Optimization for Machine Learning. PhD
thesis, University of Edinburgh, 2017.
[KSDY17] Can Karakus, Yifan Sun, Suhas N. Diggavi, and Wotao Yin. Straggler mitigation in distributed
optimization through data encoding. In In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS 2017, 4-9 December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5440–5448, 2017.
[KSDY19] CanKarakus,YifanSun,SuhasN.Diggavi,andWotaoYin. Redundancytechniquesforstraggler
mitigation in distributed optimization and learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20:72:1–72:47, 2019.
[LLP+18] Kangwook Lee, Maximilian Lam, Ramtin Pedarsani, Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos, and Kannan
Ramchandran. Speedingupdistributedmachinelearningusingcodes. IEEE Trans. Information
Theory, 64(3):1514–1529, 2018.
[LSP82] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The byzantine generals problem. ACM
Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 4(3):382–401, July 1982.
[LXC+19] Liping Li, Wei Xu, Tianyi Chen, Georgios B. Giannakis, and Qing Ling. RSA: byzantine-
robust stochastic aggregation methods for distributed learning from heterogeneous datasets. In
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 1544–1551, 2019.
[LZZ+17] XiangruLian,CeZhang,HuanZhang,Cho-JuiHsieh,WeiZhang,andJiLiu. Candecentralized
algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? A case study for decentralized parallel stochas-
tic gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS 2017, 4-9
December 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 5336–5346, 2017.
[ME08] M. Mishali and Y. C. Eldar. Reduce and boost: Recovering arbitrary sets of jointly sparse
vectors. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 56(10):4692–4702, Oct 2008.
[MGR18] El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Sébastien Rouault. The hidden vulnerability
of distributed learning in byzantium. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, pages
3518–3527, 2018.
[Nes12] Yurii Nesterov. Efficiency of coordinate descent methods on huge-scale optimization problems.
SIAM Journal on Optimization, 22(2):341–362, 2012.
[RSS12] Alexander Rakhlin, Ohad Shamir, and Karthik Sridharan. Making gradient descent optimal for
strongly convex stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, June 26 - July 1, 2012, 2012.
[RT16] PeterRichtárikandMartinTakáč.Parallelcoordinatedescentmethodsforbigdataoptimization.
Mathematical Programming, 156(1):433–484, Mar 2016.
[RTDT18] Netanel Raviv, Rashish Tandon, Alex Dimakis, and Itzhak Tamo. Gradient coding from cyclic
MDScodesandexpandergraphs.InProceedingsofthe35thInternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, pages 4302–
4310, 2018.
[RWCP19] Shashank Rajput, Hongyi Wang, Zachary B. Charles, and Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos. DETOX:
A redundancy-based framework for faster and more robust gradient aggregation. In NeurIPS,
pages 10320–10330, 2019.
[Saa03] Y. Saad. Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems. Society for Industrial and Applied Math-
ematics, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2nd edition, 2003.
[Sha79] Adi Shamir. How to share a secret. Commun. ACM, 22(11):612–613, 1979.
37
[ST11] ShaiShalev-ShwartzandAmbujTewari. Stochasticmethodsforl1-regularizedlossminimization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:1865–1892, 2011.
[SX19] Lili Su and Jiaming Xu. Securing distributed gradient descent in high dimensional statistical
learning. POMACS, 3(1):12:1–12:41, 2019.
[Tib15] Ryan Tibshirani. Convex optimization lecture notes. http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~ryantibs/
convexopt-S15/scribes/08-prox-grad-scribed.pdf, 2015.
[TLDK17] Rashish Tandon, Qi Lei, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Nikos Karampatziakis. Gradient coding:
Avoiding stragglers in distributed learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
onMachineLearning,ICML2017,Sydney,NSW,Australia,6-11August2017,pages3368–3376,
2017.
[Wri15] Stephen J. Wright. Coordinate descent algorithms. Math. Program., 151(1):3–34, 2015.
[XKG19] Cong Xie, Sanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Zeno: Distributed stochastic gradient descent
withsuspicion-basedfault-tolerance. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pages 6893–6901, 2019.
[YCRB18] Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Kannan Ramchandran, and Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust dis-
tributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-
15, 2018, pages 5636–5645, 2018.
[YCRB19] DongYin,YudongChen,KannanRamchandran,andPeterL.Bartlett. Defendingagainstsaddle
point attack in byzantine-robust distributed learning. In ICML, pages 7074–7084, 2019.
[YLR+19] Qian Yu, Songze Li, Netanel Raviv, Seyed Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Mahdi
Soltanolkotabi, and Amir Salman Avestimehr. Lagrange coded computing: Optimal design for
resiliency,security,andprivacy. InInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-
tics (AISTATS), pages 1215–1225, 2019.
[ZWLS10] MartinZinkevich,MarkusWeimer,LihongLi,andAlexJSmola. Parallelizedstochasticgradient
descent. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2595–2603, 2010.
38
