Deep Learning Relevance: Creating Relevant Information
(as Opposed to Retrieving it)
Christina Lioma Birger Larsen
DepartmentofComputerScience DepartmentofCommunication
UniversityofCopenhagen,Denmark AalborgUniversityCopenhagen,Denmark
c.lioma@di.ku.dk birger@hum.aau.dk
Casper Petersen Jakob Grue Simonsen
DepartmentofComputerScience DepartmentofComputerScience
UniversityofCopenhagen,Denmark UniversityofCopenhagen,Denmark
cazz@di.ku.dk simonsen@di.ku.dk
ABSTRACT reported [11] to having run a test that pitted a group of its
humanengineersagainstRankBrain,itsdeeplearningalgo-
WhatifInformationRetrieval(IR)systemsdidnotjustre-
rithm. Both RankBrain and human engineers were asked
trieve relevant information that is stored in their indices,
to look at various web pages and decide which would rank
butcouldalso“understand”itandsynthesiseitintoasingle
highestbytheGooglesearchengine. Whilethehumanengi-
document? We present a preliminary study that makes a
neerswereright70%ofthetime,RankBrainwasright80%
first step towards answering this question.
of the time [11].
Givenaquery,wetrainaRecurrentNeuralNetwork(RNN)
Motivated by these developments, we ask the following
on existing relevant information to that query. We then
question: is it possible to train an IR system to learn and
use the RNN to “deep learn” a single, synthetic, and we
create new relevant information, instead of just retrieving
assume, relevant document for that query. We design a
existing indexed information? In other words, what if we
crowdsourcing experiment to assess how relevant the“deep
could push IR systems one step further so that they do not
learned”document is, compared to existing relevant docu-
just return the relevant information stored in their indices,
ments. Users are shown a query and four wordclouds (of
buttheysynthesiseitintoasingle,relevantdocumentthat,
threeexistingrelevantdocumentsandourdeeplearnedsyn-
weassume,encompassesallindexedrelevantinformationto
thetic document). The synthetic document is ranked on
thatquery? WepresentamethodfordoingsoinSection3.
average most relevant of all.
Experiments with crowdsourced users (discussed in Section
4) show that the new,“deep learned”synthetic documents
CategoriesandSubjectDescriptors
(representedaswordclouds)areconsideredonaveragemore
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval relevant to user queries, than the existing relevant indexed
Models documents (also represented as wordclouds).
Keywords
2. RELATEDWORK
1. INTRODUCTION We briefly discuss applications of deep learning to IR.
A more comprehensive overview of deep learning for web
Deep neural networks aim to mimick the multiple layers
search in particular can be found in [9], chapter 7.2.5.
ofneuronsthatoperateinthehumanbraininordertolearn
AcommonapplicationofdeeplearningtoIRisforlearn-
howtosolveawiderangeofinterestingproblems,likeidenti-
ing to rank, covering a wide range of subtopics within this
fyingphotos[7]orrespondingtowebsearchqueries[19,22].
area,forinstancefromtheearlierRankNet[3],andmethods
For Information Retrieval (IR), the main idea behind deep
forhyperlinkedwebpages[16],tostudiesoflistwisecompar-
learning is that, given enough input data (such as search
isons[4],shorttextpairwisereranking[17],andelimination
enginequeriesoruserclicks),adeeplearningalgorithmcan
strategies [20].
learn the underlying semantics of this data (and hence em-
Deep learning has also been used to develop semantic or
ulate“understanding”it), and as a result lead to improved
topic models in IR. Wang et al. [21]“deep learned”both
ways of responding to search queries. Google was recently
single and multiple term topics, which they integrated into
a query likelihood language model for retrieval. Ranzato et
al. [15]useddeeplearninginasemi-supervisedwaytobuild
documentrepresentationsthatretaintermco-occurrencein-
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofpartorallofthisworkfor
personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesare formation (as opposed to only bag of words). Huang et al.
notmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopies [6] and Shen et al. [18] deep learned latent semantic mod-
bearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird- els to map queries to their relevant documents using click-
partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored. Forallotheruses,con- through data. Ye et al. [23] also used clickthrough data to
tacttheowner/author(s).Neu-IR’16SIGIRWorkshoponNeuralInforma-
deeplearnquery-documentrelevancebymodellingthepro-
tionRetrieval,July21,2016,Pisa,Italy. (cid:13)c 2016Copyrightheldbythe
portion of people who clicked a document with respect to a
owner/author(s).
6102
nuJ
72
]RI.sc[
2v06670.6061:viXra
query,amongthepeoplewhoviewedthedocumentwithre-
specttothatquery,asabinomialdistribution. Leeetal. [8]
used deep learning for fusing multiple result lists, while Liu
et al. [10] used deep neural networks for both web search
ranking and query classification. Closest to our work, in
terms of the deep learning methods used but not the prob-
lem formulation, is the work of Palanga et al. [14], who
used recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with Long Short- Figure1: Anunrolledrecurrentneuralnetwork. Ex-
Term Memory (LSTM) cells (as we also do, discussed in ample borrowed from Olah (2015) [13].
Section 3) to create deep sentence embeddings, which they
then used to rank documents with respect to queries. The
similarity between the query and documents was measured Morespecifically,thetypeofRNNsweuseareLongShort
by the distance between their corresponding sentence em- Term Memory (LSTM) networks [5, 13], which are capable
bedding vectors. Interesting is also the study of Mitra et oflearninglong-termdependencies,i.e. estimatingtheprob-
al. [12],whouseddeeplearningforreranking(withsuccess) ability of the next character in the sequence based on the
and ranking (with less success). Specifically, Mitra et al. characters not just immediately preceding it, but also oc-
used neural word embeddings, keeping both the input and curring further back.
theoutputprojections. Theythenmappedthequerywords In principle, any algorithm capable of generating a syn-
into the input space and the document words into the out- theticdocumentfromasetofinputdocuments(andaquery)
putspace,andcomputedaquery-documentrelevancescore canbeused. WeuseRNNsduetotheirgenerallygoodper-
by aggregating the cosine similarities across all the query- formanceinvarioustasks,andalsototheirabilitytoprocess
document word pairs. They found this method effective for unlimited-length sequences of characters.
re-rankingtopretrieveddocuments,butineffectiveforrank-
ing more candidate documents.
4. EVALUATION
Finally, the IR industry has not only adopted, but also
openedupdeeplearningcomponentstothepublic. Yahoo’s
CaffeOnSpark,Google’sTensorFlow,andMicrosoft’sCNTK 4.1 ExperimentalSetup
deeplearningplatformsarenowopensource,whereasFace-
book has shared its AI hardware designs, and Baidu has 4.1.1 ExperimentalDesign
unveiled its deep learning training software.
To assess to what extent our new deep learned synthetic
document is relevant to the query, in comparison to any of
3. SYNTHESISINGRELEVANTINFORMA-
the indexed known relevant documents, we carry out the
TIONWITHRECURRENTNEURALNET- following experiment. We use a TREC test collection, for
WORKS which we have a list of previously assessed relevant docu-
ments to each query. For each query, we draw randomly
Given a query and a set of relevant documents to that
threeofitsknownrelevantdocuments. Then,wepresentto
query, we ask whether a new synthetic document can be
the user the query text and also four documents: the three
created automatically, which aggregates all the relevant in-
known relevant, and the deep learned synthetic document.
formationofthesetofrelevantdocumentstothatquery. If
Foraneasierandfasterinterpretationofthedocuments,we
so, then we reason that such a synthetic document can be
present these four documents as wordclouds, formed using
more relevant to the query than any member of the set of
only the 150 most frequent terms in each document. We
relevant documents.
present these four wordclouds not as a traditional ranked
WecreatesuchsyntheticdocumentsusingRNNs. Inorder
list, but in a 2 x 2 grid (see example in Figure 2). The
fortheRNNmodeltolearnanewsyntheticdocumentthat
wordcloudsarelabelledA,B,C,D.Wecontroltheorderof
doesnotpreviouslyexist,itneedstocapturetheunderlying
presentation, so that the wordcloud of the synthetic docu-
semantics of the query and its known relevant documents.
mentisrotatedacrossallfourpositionsanequalnumberof
Weapproximatethisbyfeedingthetextofthequeryandits
times. Thetaskoftheuseristorankthesefourwordclouds
knownrelevantdocumentsasinputtotheRNN,usingvector
by their relevance to the query.
representations of characters1, also known as embeddings.
WeexperimentwiththeTRECDisks4&5testcollection
The order of characters is important for obtaining cor-
(minus the Congressional Records) with title-only queries
rect words. Given a character, the RNN takes as input its
from TREC-6,7,8 (queries 301 - 450).
embeddingandupdatesaninternalvector(recurrentstate)
that functions as an order-sensitive summary of all the in- 4.1.2 RNNtraining
formationseenuptothatcharacter(thefirstrecurrentstate
Wetrain,foreachqueryseparately,a3-layer,512neurons
is set to the zero vector). By doing so, the RNN parame-
LSTMRNN,usingtheimplementationofJ.Johnson2onde-
terisesaconditionalprobabilitydistributiononthespaceof
faultsettings. Foreachquery,weconcatenatethetextofall
possible characters given the input encoding, and each re-
its known relevant documents into a single character-based
currentstateisusedtoestimatetheprobabilityofthenext
sequence, using a new“end-of-file”character as file separa-
character in the sequence. The process continues until an
tor. We then repeatedly sample single characters from the
end-of-document symbol is produced (see Figure 1 for an
modeluntilanend-of-filecharacterappearsinthesequence.
illustration).
Morespecifically,wedonotusethewholetextoftheknown
1Such embeddings can also be created on a word level, but
we do not experiment with this here. 2https://github.com/jcjohnson/torch-rnn
Figure 2: Example query and wordclouds shown to Crowdflower users. In this example, the synthetic
document’s wordcloud is A. Out of a total of 10 users, 8 gave valid answers for this query. Wordcloud A
was ranked on average at position 1.5 (5 users ranked it first, 2 users ranked it second, and 1 user ranked it
third).
relevant documents for a query; instead, we extract a con-
text window of ± 30 terms around every query term in the
40
document. The size of the context window is an ad-hoc
choiceaimingtotrade-offdatasparsity(iftherearetoofew
30
terms in the training set we cannot train the LSTM RNN)
and noise (terms which may not contribute to the meaning
20
of the query term). Using this setup, there was sufficient
training data for 101 out of all 150 queries. Finally, we re-
10
move terms not found in the vocabulary of the collection
and stop words.
0
4.1.3 Crowdsourcing 1 2 3 4
SYNTHETICDOC.RANK
Toassesstherelevanceofthewordcloudstothequery,we
crowdsourced users through CrowdFlower3 (CF), defining
four queries per job. Each query was assessed by 10 users.
InadditiontotheexampleshowninFigure2,therewerefour
boxes: (1)aboxaskinguserstotypetheirrankingofthefour
wordclouds,(2)ayes/noboxaskingusersiftheyunderstand
thequery,(3)acommentboxforoptionalfeedback,and(4)
aboxaskinguserstotypethetwomostsalienttermsofthe
wordcloudtheyrankedmostrelevant. Weusedthislastbox
as a way to combat crowdsourcing misconduct. We chose
thehighestqualityCFusers. Therewasaminimumtimeof
20secondsspecifiedperjob. Wedidnotuseanyrestrictions
onthecrowdsourcingplatformsthatCFsyndicatesfrom,or
on language, but we restricted participation to users from
English-speaking and northern European countries4. Users
3http://www.crowdflower.com
4Participatinguserswerefrom: USA,UK,Ireland,Canada,
New Zealand, Sweden, the Netherlands.
SEIREUQFOREBMUN
Figure 4: Average rank of synthetic documents
(binned).
were rewarded 0.1USD per job.
4.2 Findings
Wereporttheaveragerankpositionofthesyntheticdocu-
ment’swordcloudacrossallvalidusersforeachquery. This
givesoftenafloatingpointrankposition,e.g. rankposition
1.5 in the example in Figure 2. Figure 3 displays the aver-
agerankpositionsofallthesyntheticdocumentwordclouds,
and Figure 4 displays the same data but binned into rank
positions 1, 2, 3 and 4. This binning aggregates positions
1.0-1.5as1,1.6-2.5as2,2.6-3.5as3,and3.6-4.0as4.
Weseethatmostsyntheticdocumentwordcloudsareranked
at position 1 (for 45 out of 101 queries), followed closely by
Figure 3: Rank of synthetic document (averaged over all users) for all queries.
documentswereonaverageassessedmorerelevantthanthe
wordclouds of existing relevant documents. We used word-
clouds, as opposed to showing the full documents or docu-
mentsnippets,sothathumanassessorscouldhaveaneasier
andfasteroverviewofthedocumentcontents. Bydoingso,
Figure 5: Wordcloud of synthetic document for we in fact limited the user understanding of the document
query: transportation tunnel disasters. contents (synthetic or not) to just the meaning of its 150
mostfrequentterms,withoutanytermdependenceorother
co-occurrenceinformation. Thisapproachdisregardsdeeper
semantics.
Thesyntheticdocumentofeachquerywas“deeplearned”
bytrainingonknownrelevantdocumentsforthatquery. In
the absence of such previously labelled data, relevant doc-
uments can be replaced by the top-k retrieved documents
foraquery(similarlytohowpseudorelevancefeedbackap-
proximatesrelevancefeedback),orevenclick-basedapprox-
imations of relevant documents. We leave these options for
future investigation.
Finally,onceasyntheticrelevantdocumenthasbeendeep
learned for a query, there are different ways of using it. In
Figure 6: Wordcloud of synthetic document for thiswork, wesimplydisplayedittotheuser(togetherwith
query: euro opposition. otherknownrelevantdocuments)aswordclouds,inorderto
assessitsrelevance. Anotheroptionistousesuchasynthetic
document to rank all the documents in the collection, by
those ranked at position 2 (for 42 queries). The average
computingtheirsemanticdistancefromitandrankingthem
rank position of all synthetic wordclouds for all queries is
accordingly. We experimented with this idea, but found it
1.81. This indicates that the wordclouds of the synthetic
ineffective for this setup. We found it much more effective
documents were assessed by users as most relevant of all
for reranking top-retrieved documents, than for ranking all
displayed relevant documents on average.
documents in the index, similarly to [12].
Interestingly,thereareonly2syntheticdocumentswhose
wordclouds are ranked at position 4, and they are shown
in Figures 5 & 6. For these two synthetic documents, one 6. CONCLUSION
or two words had a significantly higher frequency than the
We proposed an Information Retrieval (IR) setup, where
remainingwords,andasaconsequencedominatedtheword-
the IR system does not retrieve existing information, but
clouds,makingalmostallotherwordsillegible. Inboththese
instead learns from it and produces a single relevant doc-
cases,itmakessensethatuserswouldrankthesewordclouds
ument that, we assume, encompasses all its indexed rele-
last, even if the dominating terms are relevant to the query
vant information for a query. While a decade ago such a
(see the captions of Figures 5 & 6).
setup might have sounded science-fictional, the advances of
deep learning have made this possible. Specifically, given a
5. DISCUSSION
query, we trained a character-level Long Short Term Mem-
Ourideaof“deeplearning”asinglerelevantdocumentin ory (LSTM) Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) on all its
responsetoaquerymaybereminiscentofquestionanswer- indexed relevant documents, and used it to output a new,
ing (QA) or summarisation-based IR systems. Unlike these synthetic document. We then showed the query and word-
approaches, our aim is to create a new document on some cloudrepresentationsofthreerandomlychosenexistingrele-
topic (not necessarily a question). Our approach differs in vantdocumentsandofournewsyntheticdocumenttousers,
thatthisnewdocumentissynthesisedbyhavinglearnedthe and asked them to rank them by relevance. The synthetic
underlying semantics of the training documents, instead of document was overall ranked highest across all queries and
extracting relevant parts from existing documents. users.
Our findings show that the wordcouds of the synthetic Inthefuture,weplantoexperimentwithword-levelRNNs,
whichareexpectedtoproduceevenbetterqualitysynthetic Conference of the North American Chapter of the
documents (character-level RNNs have been criticised for Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
outputting noisy pseudo-terms [2]). Language Technologies, Denver, Colorado, USA, May
31 - June 5, 2015, pages 912–921. The Association for
Acknowledgements. Computational Linguistics, 2015.
ThisworkwassupportedbytheDanishIndustryFounda- [11] C.Metz.AIistransformingGooglesearch.Therestof
tionandtheIndustrialDataAnalysisService(IDAS)project. the web is next. WIRED Magazine, 2016.
[12] B. Mitra, E. T. Nalisnick, N. Craswell, and
R. Caruana. A dual embedding space model for
7. REFERENCES document ranking. CoRR, abs/1602.01137, 2016.
[13] C. Olah. Understanding LSTM networks. GITHUB
[1] J. Bailey, A. Moffat, C. C. Aggarwal, M. de Rijke,
blog, posted on August 27, 2015, 2015.
R. Kumar, V. Murdock, T. K. Sellis, and J. X. Yu,
editors. Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on [14] H. Palangi, L. Deng, Y. Shen, J. Gao, X. He, J. Chen,
Conference on Information and Knowledge X. Song, and R. K. Ward. Deep sentence embedding
Management, CIKM 2015, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, using the long short term memory network: Analysis
October 19 - 23, 2015. ACM, 2015. and application to information retrieval. CoRR,
abs/1502.06922, 2015.
[2] P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov. Alternative
structures for character-level RNNs. CoRR, [15] M. Ranzato and M. Szummer. Semi-supervised
abs/1511.06303, 2015. learning of compact document representations with
deep networks. In W. W. Cohen, A. McCallum, and
[3] C. J. C. Burges, T. Shaked, E. Renshaw, A. Lazier,
S. T. Roweis, editors, Machine Learning, Proceedings
M.Deeds,N.Hamilton,andG.N.Hullender.Learning
of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference (ICML
to rank using gradient descent. In L. D. Raedt and
2008), Helsinki, Finland, June 5-9, 2008, volume 307
S. Wrobel, editors, Machine Learning, Proceedings of
of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series,
the Twenty-Second International Conference (ICML
pages 792–799. ACM, 2008.
2005), Bonn, Germany, August 7-11, 2005, volume
119 of ACM International Conference Proceeding [16] F. Scarselli, S. L. Yong, M. Gori, M. Hagenbuchner,
Series, pages 89–96. ACM, 2005. A. C. Tsoi, and M. Maggini. Graph neural networks
for ranking web pages. In A. Skowron, R. Agrawal,
[4] Z. Cao, T. Qin, T. Liu, M. Tsai, and H. Li. Learning
M. Luck, T. Yamaguchi, P. Morizet-Mahoudeaux,
to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise approach.
J. Liu, and N. Zhong, editors, 2005 IEEE / WIC /
In Z. Ghahramani, editor, Machine Learning,
ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International
(WI 2005), 19-22 September 2005, Compiegne,
Conference (ICML 2007), Corvallis, Oregon, USA,
France, pages 666–672. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.
June 20-24, 2007, volume 227 of ACM International
Conference Proceeding Series, pages 129–136. ACM, [17] A. Severyn and A. Moschitti. Learning to rank short
2007. text pairs with convolutional deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR
[5] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term
Conference on Research and Development in
memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’15, pages 373–382, New
[6] P.Huang,X.He,J.Gao,L.Deng,A.Acero,andL.P.
York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
Heck. Learning deep structured semantic models for
[18] Y. Shen, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and G. Mesnil. A
web search using clickthrough data. In Q. He,
latent semantic model with convolutional-pooling
A. Iyengar, W. Nejdl, J. Pei, and R. Rastogi, editors,
structure for information retrieval. In J. Li, X. S.
22nd ACM International Conference on Information
Wang, M. N. Garofalakis, I. Soboroff, T. Suel, and
and Knowledge Management, CIKM’13, San
M. Wang, editors, Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
Francisco, CA, USA, October 27 - November 1, 2013,
International Conference on Conference on
pages 2333–2338. ACM, 2013.
Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
[7] A. Khosla, A. S. Raju, A. Torralba, and A. Oliva.
2014, Shanghai, China, November 3-7, 2014, pages
Understanding and predicting image memorability at
101–110. ACM, 2014.
a large scale. In 2015 IEEE International Conference
[19] A. Sordoni, Y. Bengio, H. Vahabi, C. Lioma, J. G.
on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015, Santiago, Chile,
Simonsen, and J. Nie. A hierarchical recurrent
December 7-13, 2015, pages 2390–2398. IEEE
encoder-decoder for generative context-aware query
Computer Society, 2015.
suggestion. In Bailey et al. [1], pages 553–562.
[8] C. Lee, Q. Ai, W. B. Croft, and D. Sheldon. An
[20] T. Tran, D. Phung, and S. Venkatesh. Choice by
optimization framework for merging multiple result
elimination via deep neural networks. CoRR,
lists. In Bailey et al. [1], pages 303–312.
abs/1602.05285, 2016.
[9] H. Li and J. Xu. Semantic matching in search.
[21] X. Wang, A. McCallum, and X. Wei. Topical n-grams:
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval,
Phrase and topic discovery, with an application to
7(5):343–469, 2014.
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE
[10] X. Liu, J. Gao, X. He, L. Deng, K. Duh, and
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM
Y. Wang. Representation learning using multi-task
2007), October 28-31, 2007, Omaha, Nebraska, USA,
deep neural networks for semantic classification and
pages 697–702. IEEE Computer Society, 2007.
information retrieval. In R. Mihalcea, J. Y. Chai, and
[22] H.Wu,Y.Hu,H.Li,andE.Chen.Anewapproachto
A. Sarkar, editors, NAACL HLT 2015, The 2015
query segmentation for relevance ranking in web
search. Inf. Retr. Journal, 18(1):26–50, 2015.
[23] X. Ye, Z. Qi, and D. Massey. Learning relevance from
click data via neural network based similarity models.
In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Big Data,
Big Data 2015, Santa Clara, CA, USA, October 29 -
November 1, 2015, pages 801–806. IEEE, 2015.
