TITLE PAGE
Title: Diversifying the Genomic Data Science Research Community
Running Title: Equal Access in Genomic Data Science
Authors: The Genomic Data Science Community Network, Rosa Alcazar1, Maria Alvarez2, Rachel Arnold3,
Mentewab Ayalew4, Lyle G. Best5, Michael C. Campbell6, Kamal Chowdhury7, Katherine E. L. Cox8, Christina
Daulton9, Youping Deng10, Carla Easter11, Karla Fuller12, Shazia Tabassum Hakim13, Ava M. Hoffman8, Natalie
Kucher14, Andrew Lee15, Joslynn Lee16, Jeffrey T. Leek8, Robert Meller17, Loyda B. Méndez18, Miguel P.
Méndez-González19, Stephen Mosher14, Michele Nishiguchi20, Siddharth Pratap21, Tiffany Rolle9, Sourav Roy22,
Rachel Saidi23, Michael C. Schatz24, Shurjo K. Sen9, James Sniezek25, Edu Suarez Martinez26, Frederick J.
Tan27, Jennifer Vessio14, Karriem Watson28, Wendy Westbroek29, Joseph Wilcox30, Carrie Wright8, Xianfa Xie31
1Clovis Community College, Fresno, CA, 2Biology, El Paso Community College, El Paso,TX 3US Fish and
Wildlife (Northwest Indian College), Onalaska, WI, 4Biology Department, Spelman College, Atlanta, GA, 5Turtle
Mountain Community College, Belcourt, ND, 6Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles CA, 7Biology Department, Claflin University, Orangeburg, SC, 8Department of
Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, 9National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 10Department of Quantitative Health Sciences,
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, 11Smithsonian Institute National Museum of Natural History,
Washington, DC, 12Guttman Community College, New York, NY, 13Department of Microbiology and Biomedical
Sciences, Dine College, Tuba City, AZ, 14Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
15Department of Biology, Northern Virginia Community College - Alexandria, Alexandria, VA, 16Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Fort Lewis College, Durango, CO, 17Department of Neurobiology, Morehouse
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 18Science & Technology, Universidad Ana G. Méndez – Carolina, Carolina,
PR, 19Natural Sciences Department, University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla, Aguadilla, PR, 20Department of
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, 21School of Graduate Studies and
Research, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, 22Department of Biological Sciences and Border
1
Biomedical Research Center, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, 23Department of Math, Statistics,
and Data Science, Montgomery College, Rockville, MD, 24Departments of Biology and Computer Science,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 25Chemical and Biological Sciences, Montgomery College,
Germantown, MD, 26Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico – Ponce, Ponce, PR, 27Department of
Embryology, Carnegie Institution, Baltimore, MD, 28National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 29Department
of Biology, Flathead Valley Community College, Kalispell, MT, 30Department of Biology, Nevada State College,
Henderson, NV, 31Department of Biology, Virginia State University, Petersburg, VA
Corresponding Author and complete contact information:
Rosa Alcazar
Clovis Community College
Department of Science
10309 N. Willow
Fresno, CA 93730, USA
rosa.alcazar@cloviscollege.edu
Ava M. Hoffman
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Biostatistics
615 N Wolfe St
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
ava.hoffman@jhu.edu
Joslynn Lee
Fort Lewis College
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
2
1000 Rim Drive
Durango, CO 81301, USA
jslee@fortlewis.edu
Sourav Roy
University of Texas at El Paso
Department of Biological Sciences and Border Biomedical Research Center
College of Science
500 W University
El Paso, TX 79902, USA
sroy1@utep.edu
3
ABSTRACT
Over the last 20 years, the explosion of genomic data collection and the cloud computing revolution have made
computational and data science research accessible to anyone with a web browser and an internet connection.
However, students at institutions with limited resources have received relatively little exposure to curricula or
professional development opportunities that lead to careers in genomic data science. To broaden participation
in genomics research, the scientific community needs to support these programs in local education and
research at Underserved Institutions (UIs). These include Community Colleges, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Hispanic-Serving Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and Universities that support ethnically, racially,
and socioeconomically underrepresented students in the US. We have formed the Genomic Data Science
Community Network (http://www.gdscn.org/) to support students, faculty, and their networks to identify
opportunities and broaden access to genomic data science. These opportunities include: expanding access to
infrastructure and data, providing UI faculty development opportunities, strengthening collaborations among
faculty, recognizing UI teaching and research excellence, fostering student awareness, developing modular
and open-source resources, expanding Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs),
building curriculum, supporting student professional development and research, and removing financial
barriers through funding programs and collaborator support.
4
FOUNDATIONS FOR JUSTICE IN GENOMIC DATA SCIENCE
Despite growing opportunities in data science careers, systemic barriers have limited the participation of
underrepresented groups in genomic data science research and education (Canner et al. 2017). Among
Bachelor’s degree recipients in biological sciences, computer sciences, mathematics, and statistics from
2006-2016, 8.7% were Hispanic or Latinx, 7.8% were Black or African American, and 1.9% were multi-racial
and/or indigenous American (National Science Foundation 2019a). Meanwhile, these groups represent 16.3%,
12.3%, and 2.5% of the United States resident population, respectively (National Science Foundation 2019a).
Disparities are more pronounced in graduate education (Wiley et al. 2020). Affinity organizations where
members of underrepresented groups come together are vital to developing a sense of belonging and support
system (Table S1). However, for true representation in research, science needs inclusive spaces where
researchers can communicate actively with educators and students are supported in developing STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) identities.
The technological advancements of high-throughput sequencing in the last two decades have enabled the
rapid proliferation of genomic data (Goodwin et al. 2016) but they have also led to an even greater access
imbalance. Over 60 petabases of data (National Center for Biotechnology Information 2021), or about a million
times the size of the original human genome project (International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium
2001), are currently available within the US National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) genomic
sequencing repositories. This wealth of data will help scientists determine disease risk, diagnose rare
conditions, improve drug safety and efficacy (Manolio et al. 2019), survey pathogens for public health
applications (Khoury et al. 2020), and even combat the effects of climate change (Hoffmann et al. 2021). Our
greatest limitation is personnel to interpret these data. Yet, genomic data science currently lacks a scaffolded
mechanism that supports all individuals and provides a hub of intellectual capital, curated genomic data, and
the infrastructure required for authentic learning gained through research experiences. Broader, more diverse
participation should be the starting point for creating a more inclusive genomic data science field (Mapes et al.
5
2020). Focusing on participation is not only ethical but desirable for more novel solutions to problems (Hofstra
et al. 2020) and necessary for bringing different perspectives to the table (Zook et al. 2017).
Our vision for a diverse scientific community engaged in genomic data science research is one in which
researchers, educators, and students thrive in a just and fair system, not limited by their institution’s scientific
clout, resources, geographical location, or infrastructure (Figure 1). Here, we focus on traditionally
Underserved Institutions (UIs) in the United States, which include Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) defined
by the US Department of Education: Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs), and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) (Li and Carroll 2007). Underserved Institutions
(UIs) also include Community Colleges (CCs) and some Primarily Undergraduate Institutions that overlap
substantially with MSIs (Nguyen et al. 2015). Collectively, UIs play a critical role in educating ethnically, racially,
and socioeconomically underrepresented students despite limited access to resources (Li and Carroll 2007). In
addition to the number of traditionally underrepresented students educated at UIs, these colleges and
universities possess unique strengths, such as the greater sense of belonging, more positive mentoring
relationships, and role modeling (Gin et al. 2021; Jayabalan et al. 2021). Faculty and staff at these institutions
also have experience with the specific interests, needs, challenges, and concerns of the populations they serve
(Text S1). UIs are therefore essential to removing systemic bottlenecks that lead to a homogenous workforce.
6
In this perspective, we share lessons learned from forming the institutionally diverse Genomic Data Science
Community Network, GDSCN (http://www.gdscn.org/). Throughout a series of symposiums, one-on-one
meetings, and electronic communications, we have provided a platform to listen to the needs of faculty
constituents from UIs. Together, we have identified the needs and opportunities in our current academic sphere
and its limitations to achieving better representation. While there are several outstanding communities and
recent insights for broadening participation in bioinformatics (Jayabalan et al. 2021; Hemming et al. 2019;
Buchwald and Dick 2011; Garrison et al. 2019), here we focus on challenges shared broadly by faculty at UIs
and action items that can be taken to address them (Figure 2). We highlight ways in which outside funders and
researchers at R1 institutions – Doctoral Universities with very high research activity (McCormick and Zhao
2005) – can support their colleagues at UIs. With support from funding institutions and a dedicated GDSCN
membership, we believe our model will contribute to the organic diversification of genomic data science
research.
7
PROVIDE ACCESS TO INFRASTRUCTURE AND DATA
One of the most immediate inequalities is access to data storage and computing power, which are essential
prerequisites for genomic data science analyses. Financing computing clusters typically owned and managed
by R1 institutions is cost limiting for most UIs, especially if a limited number of faculty members will use it.
Cloud computing resources are becoming an increasingly attractive alternative. Institutions only pay for the
computing time used, have a lower barrier to entry, require no upfront investment, and ensure students have
equal access to software versions (Navale and Bourne 2018) (Table S2). For example, the AnVIL platform
(Schatz et al. 2021) provides multiple entry points for different levels of experience, from command line access
and R/Python notebooks to the no-code-needed Galaxy user interface (Jalili et al. 2020). Fees for compute
time and disk storage space are explicitly stated upfront. Other examples include the CyVerse Discovery
8
Environment (Merchant et al. 2016; Goff et al. 2011) which provides a cloud computing space and includes
tools for teaching as well as Galaxy’s cloud platform (https://usegalaxy.org/). Laptop or device carts for labs or
projects can also reduce the cost burden on students. Combined with affordable devices, such as
Chromebooks or tablets, cloud computing can be a powerful, low-barrier resource for democratizing authentic
data science experiences in general.
NURTURE CROSS-INSTITUTIONAL INTELLECTUAL ENVIRONMENTS
FUND ONGOING FACULTY DEVELOPMENT
Broadening participation in genomic data science research depends on a strong support system for faculty at
UIs. Yet, resources at these institutions are often stretched thin, making hiring and training the appropriate
personnel extremely difficult. Many faculty also have high teaching loads with little time for continuing
education, leaving instructors underprepared to teach rapidly evolving genomic data science topics (Williams et
al. 2019; Zhan et al. 2019). Financing and incentivizing professional development outreach programs can help
meet these challenges. Organizations can follow other successful programs, such as the National Human
Genome Research Institute’s (NHGRI) Short Course in Genomics (Robbins et al. 2021). This program provides
lectures and hands-on learning and has successfully reached over 100 faculty that continue to teach in diverse
communities. Events are also hosted by the IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence (INBRE)
(National Institutes of Health 2021b). Continued mentorship and resource sharing from NIH researchers and
staff after completion of the short course also ensure longer-term positive outcomes.
9
Outside of government sponsored programs, small grants funding workshops, conferences, or assistants (such
as research or teaching assistants) can substantially empower UI faculty. Researchers at R1 institutions can
build on-demand materials for self-directed faculty education and/or tailor “train the trainer” workshops for
faculty needs and interests. For example, the Jackson Laboratory designed a week-long course, Big Genomic
10
Data Skills Training for Professors, to train small college and regional university faculty (Zhan et al. 2019).
Leaders at R1 institutions should commit to honoring these contributions when considering teaching, service,
outreach, and/or tenure committee decisions.
Within UIs, administrators should encourage protected time and teaching release for attending workshops,
writing proposals, and/or developing new curriculum. They should incentivize faculty members to pursue
educational and research opportunities in genomic data science for the students and the university. Dedicated
sabbatical time allows UI faculty to develop research and coursework with outside faculty (Hemming et al.
2019) and innovate new student experiences (Yarmohammadian et al. 2018). Future initiatives can capitalize
on a sabbatical internship/exchange model, where faculty can choose to travel to different research labs and
gain exposure to additional research initiatives and peer mentorship. Not only do these professional
experiences enhance skill-building, they also help future collaborators find one another and organically build
collegiate networks.
Faculty members at UIs who have research expertise should be incentivized to build up their colleagues
through peer sharing and learning. Programs like the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) and HBCU Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) (National
Science Foundation 2017a), as well as INBRE specifically support these efforts within UIs. Additionally, the
recently established NHGRI Office of Training, Diversity and Health Equity (TiDHE) aims to coordinate training
and career development for a more diverse genomics workforce (National Institutes of Health 2021c). Faculty
who are entirely dedicated to teaching can use these funds to engage students in authentic research activities
and to explore pedagogical studies. Furthermore, with administrative support within the same institution,
experienced faculty can help develop “pathways”(from beginner to more advanced) by which their colleagues
can progressively learn (Crown et al. 2011). Going beyond one-off workshop experiences to form development
plans could help make faculty participation both effective and scalable.
11
FACILITATE FULFILLING COLLABORATION
Collaboration among institutions ensures faculty come in contact with a diversity of topics and perspectives
and are set up for success, from proposal to publication (Hemming et al. 2019). All UI faculty should consider
meeting collaborators through established programs like the National Research Mentoring Network (NRMN,
https://nrmnet.net/) (Hemming et al. 2019), which connects experienced research mentors with student and
faculty mentees from Minority Serving Institutions. The Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE)
matches faculty with mentors for hands-on research experience at one of the US Department of Energy’s
sponsoring agencies (https://orise.orau.gov/). Affinity groups, such as the Native Investigator Development
Program (NIDP) and others (Table S1), can also contribute toward fruitful, collaborative relationships
(Buchwald and Dick 2011). Government programs can also help sponsor additional community building. For
example, the Research Coordination Networks Program aims to foster synthesis, new collaborations, and
resource sharing while advancing research and education (National Science Foundation 2017b).
Collaborative networks must position UI faculty in leadership roles while actively engaging them in setting
goals and priorities. Currently, only a small number of programs specifically target these faculty. For example,
the INBRE and Bridges to the Baccalaureate (National Institutes of Health 2021a) programs sponsor
collaboration between 2-year and 4-year UI teaching institutions and R1 research institutions with the goal of
supporting faculty and providing student research opportunities. Other collaborative networks, such as the
Network for Integrating Bioinformatics into Life Sciences Education (NIBLSE), aim to support faculty in
bioinformatics coursework while encouraging professional achievement via publication (Dinsdale et al. 2015).
In addition to connecting through scientific conferences and meetings, hands-on workshops for faculty and/or
students, bioinformatics outreach efforts, and seminar series, these programs can help move toward balancing
access to collaborative networks.
12
RECOGNIZE FACULTY RESEARCH AND TEACHING
Recognizing the research breakthroughs by faculty has a two-fold benefit: it rewards faculty members’ hard
work and raises awareness and discussion in the broader community. Sharing the research experiences on
social media platforms, such as Twitter (https://twitter.com/), is perhaps the fastest and easiest way to gain
academic recognition and raise awareness (Cheplygina et al. 2020). Faculty should work together to amplify
each other’s work. Social media-savvy faculty might consider social media workshops for those who are not
used to engaging on these platforms. Where possible, faculty should leverage their institutional press/media
office to create releases and/or posts or use organizations that aggregate blog or social media posts. Using
social media and blogs to disseminate work can raise important questions, such as when and how work should
be shared among stakeholders, from public relations offices at institutions to Tribal leadership. Research
symposia can also serve to showcase faculty participation and collaboration while making them feel included in
the community. Existing programs, such as the NHGRI Short Course in Genomics (Robbins et al. 2021)
provide faculty the opportunity to present work to NIH teams as well as other conference communities. Virtual
conferences, having evolved quickly during the COVID-19 pandemic (Jarvis et al. 2020), can provide both a
low-cost and accessible way to feature faculty and student research experiences.
Faculty need to be acknowledged for their excellence in research as well as their hard work teaching and
applying for funding, regardless of award status. Non-financial awards at all levels, from institution and school
or division to department, are relatively easy to establish for innovative contributions to curriculum content,
teaching, research, service, outreach, and mentoring. Administrators can show faculty they are valued by
considering such awards in tenure or promotion decisions. As courses in genomic data science are often
co-taught by faculty members from different disciplines or with different expertises, university administrators
should also create straightforward methods to attribute teaching credits to each participating faculty member
and count that in their total teaching load. Overall, empowering UI faculty will lead to greater diversity among
faculty researchers in genomic data science (Whittaker et al. 2015). Improved faculty representation also
paves the way for improved student achievement, recruitment, and retention (Merisotis and McCarthy 2005).
13
ENGINEER MULTIPLE STUDENT PATHWAYS
FOSTER STUDENT AWARENESS
With infrastructure and a faculty foundation established, engaging students and the community directly is
required for broadening long-term student participation. In fact, a recent survey highlights that a tribal
community has specifically requested more genetics education within their community (Claw et al. 2021).
Based on our assessment of the role of CCs, HBCUs, HSIs, and TCUs within their communities, these are the
best institutions to provide this education. However, students starting their post-secondary education with
interests in biological sciences might have little to no exposure to genomic data science as a potential area of
study and career path. Moreover, the sheer volume of topics to cover in introductory biology courses and time
needed for molecular “wet” lab instruction can make incorporating additional bioinformatics and genomics
topics difficult. Existing resources also tend to be less specialized. Thus, to facilitate early student exposure to
genomic data science, faculty likely need to restructure and/or update introductory biology courses to include
essential material on genomics and bioinformatics.
To foster early awareness, instructors can briefly introduce genomic data science topics in first-year/freshman
colloquia (e.g., (Clark and Cundiff 2011), seminars, and professional/career development courses. Topics
should highlight the challenging and fulfilling career opportunities and the potential for a meaningful impact
within their communities. Technical development and bioethics should also be emphasized in these courses.
Diverse interests, such as computer science, statistics, or other interdisciplinary majors, can be accommodated
via course cross-listing. Departments can also host joint seminar series where students have the opportunity to
meet genomic data science researchers working in academic, industrial, and/or nonprofit careers. College
administrators should support faculty as they develop best practices for introducing this rapidly growing
discipline to students.
14
The final years of secondary school are a pivotal time for students. Faculty should focus on raising awareness,
including via open houses, easy-to-find websites, workshops, and weekend learning experiences. Reaching
out to high school student STEM clubs, or sponsoring the development of such clubs, can serve as a channel
by which to encourage participation. Providing opportunities for college or university visits for students can
improve student self-efficacy and give them the tools they need to select their postsecondary career path
(Glessner et al. 2017; Boatright 2020). A one-day congress that brings students from multiple high schools to a
college or university could allow students to meet practicing scientists. Early College High Schools (ECHS) and
Dual-enrollment programs, which allow students to simultaneously earn a high school diploma and an
Associate’s degree, could provide a conduit for reaching students historically underrepresented in higher
education (Texas Education Agency 2020; Virginia Community Colleges 2020). Development of strong
partnerships between the high school independent districts and higher education institutions is key to the
success of these initiatives. The DataTrail (https://www.datatrail.org/) program also provides a successful
model by which high schoolers and GED earners can connect directly to faculty mentors and data science
employment.
Raising awareness among even younger students in primary and secondary school is a recognized need
(Morgan et al. 2016). Fundamental education in programming (e.g., via games, (Lindberg et al. 2019)) can lay
the foundation for scientific analysis; the genomic data science community should work with teachers to
provide age-appropriate activities. Access to computers is a consistent challenge, although smart devices like
phones and tablets can be powerful tools when combined with cloud resources (Table S2). Despite
technological advancements, preschool and kindergarten teachers often feel unsupported and underprepared
to teach STEM, contributing to underrepresentation that is persistent and pervasive (Fuller et al. 2021).
Remedying resource and training inequities must be a funding priority as government agencies consider
broader initiatives to introduce data science more prominently into primary and secondary school education.
15
DESIGN MODULAR, OPEN-SOURCE LEARNING RESOURCES
Most life science instructors agree that bioinformatics knowledge and skills are essential to biology students
(Wilson Sayres et al. 2018). One of the great successes of data science more broadly is the proliferation of
open source and open access resources. Many freely available online resources have emerged with the
growing interest in genomic data science, including the Coursera Genomic Data Science Specialization
(https://www.coursera.org/specializations/genomic-data-science) and Bioinformatics Algorithms
(https://www.bioinformaticsalgorithms.org/). Both of these courses have already reached hundreds of
thousands of students. While massive online open courses (MOOCs) are broadening access to education,
additional support (such as community building and awareness, confidence building, faculty training) is needed
for learners from underrepresented groups (Stich and Reeves 2017). UI faculty can serve as important bridges
between MOOC material and UI students, but instructors still face many ongoing challenges. UI faculty must
wade through the wealth of material to find content that is appropriate and interesting for their target audience
or is specific to a particular application, topic, or technique. Finding activities that are modular and
interchangeable given their existing course lesson plans takes time. In some cases, restrictive licensing for
“remixing” and updating as needed is a barrier. Many educators, UI and R1 alike, also struggle to keep pace
with constantly evolving approaches (Ryder et al. 2020).
Because many resources already exist to teach data science more generally, new development can focus on
free interactive platforms (Kross et al. 2020) and/or open source methods for updating and remixing content to
make it more accessible (Savonen et al. 2022). In general, resources teaching introductory concepts,
foundational statistics, and programming skills should continue to be made open source wherever possible
(Table S3). For more specific genomics content, R1 developers should work with UI faculty to develop
relevant, approachable content that can be freely accessed and tailored as needed. These partnerships can be
incentivized by administration and sponsoring agencies by including it in promotion and/or funding decisions.
Another successful approach is to include instructor guides within materials, such as the teaching instructions
included with the modular Microbiome QIIME2 activity developed by UI faculty (see GitHub link: Lee 2019).
16
DEMOCRATIZE RESEARCH EXPERIENCE THROUGH CUREs
Undergraduate research experiences can improve outcomes for historically underrepresented students in the
sciences (Carpi et al. 2017; Krim et al. 2019). Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience, or CUREs,
bring students directly to authentic research with their peers in a classroom setting and are defined by use of
scientific practices, discovery, relevant and/or important work, collaboration, and iteration (Auchincloss et al.
2014). Whereas government-focused programs (such as the NSF REU program) traditionally offer limited lab
space to a small number of students, CUREs expose a larger group of students in tandem (Elgin et al. 2021).
CUREs break down student financial and personal barriers and can minimize faculty members’ unconscious
bias (Bangera and Brownell 2014). Furthermore, flexible CUREs can help establish a mutually uplifting, safe,
and positive mentoring environment while creating a peer community where students can collaborate, share
discoveries, and support one another (Kokotsaki et al. 2016). Indeed, a sense of peer and institutional
belonging is a key metric for student feelings of inclusion and retention in UIs (Winkle-Wagner and McCoy
2018; Sweeder et al. 2021).
Though CUREs have many benefits (Elgin et al. 2021), UI faculty sometimes receive pushback for
implementing CUREs or requesting research classroom hours within established curricula. One solution is
creating a variety of CUREs with flexible length / timing (weeks or semester-long) in mind. For example, some
instructors might find it easier to incorporate “mini-CUREs” that require only part of the semester within an
existing course. Faculty can also consider incorporating CUREs within a senior capstone course. It is essential
that faculty collectively maintain a support system for sustainable CURE implementation (Lopatto et al. 2014;
Elgin et al. 2021). Research faculty at R1 institutions can contribute to this support system by helping develop
CUREs, making them more accessible, and/or providing “train the trainer” resources to UI faculty colleagues.
The Genomics Education Partnership (https://thegep.org/) provides training and resources for faculty
implementing CUREs. Programs like the Small World Initiative (a student education program focused on
widespread antibiotics resistance, http://www.smallworldinitiative.org/) have trained faculty at over 300 schools
to incorporate authentic research into their classrooms.
17
The key for success for any classroom content is to ensure it is relevant to real life and/or the students’ future
career goals and that it is an authentic research experience for both the faculty and students involved. There
are several examples of CUREs that have been created by UI faculty and/or implemented at UIs. The
SEA-PHAGES (Science Education Alliance-Phage Hunters Advancing Genomics and Evolutionary Science,
https://seaphages.org/) network is both an inclusive research education community and the developer of the
two-term laboratory CURE studying viral diversity, evolution, genome annotation, and bioinformatic analyses
(Jordan et al. 2014; Hanauer et al. 2017). Data generated by SEA-PHAGES students have been used in
real-time medicinal interventions and high-impact publications (Dedrick et al. 2019), which can leave a lasting
impact on students. The Clovis Community College Biol-12 Research in Biology course
(https://www.cloviscollege.edu/landing/biol-12-genomics-data-science.html) introduces data science with a
unique emphasis on university transferability while having no prerequisites (Figure 3). This course also
includes professional development for students, including presenting at a symposium and working on college
or job applications. With funding from the NIH Bridges to the Baccalaureate Program, faculty at El Paso
Community College developed Introductory Biology CURE projects focused on topics relevant to the local
US-Mexico Border community including water contamination and antibiotic resistant microorganisms. Faculty
at Virginia State University designed a research program focused on SARS-CoV-2 for the required
one-semester capstone course (Figure 3). This work demonstrated the real scientific impact of students and
faculty to help reveal a biological process that has been largely overlooked by existing studies of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus (Xie et al. 2021). Development of new CURE topics, for example DNA forensics, population
genetics of communities, or bioinformatics in nature, should thoughtfully engage with students throughout the
design process.
SHAPE CURRICULUM
Accreditations for students participating in genomic data science courses and CUREs are critical for
state-of-the-art education, retention, and enrollment growth. Yet, building new degree programs is challenging,
especially for broad, rapidly evolving domains like genomic data science. Course names like “Big Data” might
18
mean very different content, activities, platforms, and learning objectives among institutions. First, programs
should employ a “pathway model” – consisting of clear program outlines/degree plans with distinct course
sequences, learning objectives, progress milestones, and learning outcomes. Setting up guidelines and
learning objectives that would need to be covered early on will also help guide individual courses.
Standardizing learning outcomes and course titles (e.g., topic + tool, “Genomic Data Science with Galaxy”) will
provide a more detailed picture of the student’s exposure to specific skills and topics. To allow students to
explore tools more in depth, some institutions might find it beneficial to include coding languages (e.g., R or
python) as part of the computer literacy or general education requirements.
Faculty at UIs have already been successful in piloting genomic data science curriculum. The St. Mary’s
University B.S. in Bioinformatics (Table S4) was launched in the Fall of 2019, and currently has 43 students
enrolled in the program (Figure 3). The Genomics and Bioinformatics Program at Virginia State University
provides training in genomics, computer science, and statistics for students from different majors including
biology, computer science, mathematics, and agriculture. These students take the same high-level genomics
and programming for bioinformatics courses during their third year and conduct research throughout their
degree, culminating in a one-year extensive research course during their senior year.
Partnerships among research and undergraduate-focused institutions can be a powerful tool for modeling
transferability and curriculum standardization. For example, New Jersey’s 3+1 program (Rowan College at
Burlington County 2021), University of California-Los Angeles’ Center for Community College Partnerships
(https://www.aap.ucla.edu/units/cccp/), and Virginia’s Statewide Transfer Agreement
(https://www.vccs.edu/transfer-programs/) partner community colleges with four-year research institutions,
reducing the cost burden on students seeking genomic data science degrees. Students obtaining an associate
degree and earning a minimum grade point average from Virginia’s community colleges can guarantee
admission to any of more than 30 Virginia colleges and universities, including those offering B.S degrees in
Bioinformatics or Data Science. Faculty and administrators involved with these degree programs at R1
19
institutions can better support incoming students by offering tailored recommendations, such as suggested
prerequisites. This translates to a broader diversity of transfer students set up for success.
IGNITE CAREERS THROUGH DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH
Data science careers have grown rapidly in the past decade, providing an exciting opportunity as companies
are working hard to fill the global talent gap (Rawlings-Goss 2019). However, students might not be well
acquainted with the next steps in their professional career beyond academic credit. Mentorship to help
students explore and/or identify further career opportunities would help bridge this gap, whether students are
applying to summer research programs, transferring to research institutions, exploring graduate school
degrees, or entering the workforce. To remove barriers for applying to summer research programs and other
positions, R1 and UIs with larger research programs should create application guides, offer workshops,
information sessions, recruiting events, and/or alumni panels. Visual tools for mapping opportunities by
location, topic, and experience level (i.e., undergraduate or graduate) could also be useful. Next-step
opportunities offered by research institutions should provide clear information about stipends and flexibility, if
possible (Jensen et al. 2021). Creating new student-focused symposia, even if small in size, is another
straightforward way to engage a broad array of students by building confidence and creating a supportive and
engaging experience among peers. Funding agencies and research institutions should be incentivized to make
introductions and help build broader networks that include industry, non-profit, and other non-academic data
scientists. Targeted training for different groups can also be an excellent way to help students transition to next
steps in their careers. For example, the Summer internship for INdigenous peoples in Genomics (SING,
https://sing.igb.illinois.edu/) workshop trains indigenous peoples in the concepts and methods currently used in
genomic research while discussing the uses, misuses and limitations of genomics as a tool for indigenous
peoples' communities. Finally, students could also be encouraged to consider outside accreditation, such as
the existing American Statistical Association Accreditation
(https://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Accreditation.aspx) to demonstrate their achievements where
internal certificates or programs are unavailable.
20
From the student perspective, identifying outside learning and professional development requires knowing
what and where to search ahead of time. This can be remedied by engaging students earlier during secondary
education. While college visits are useful for building interest in postsecondary education in general, a one-day
science congress targeted toward high school students hosted by a college or university could create
connections between students and practicing scientists. These connections could help students find
opportunities and could even evolve to closer mentor-mentee relationships. For students already at 2-year or
4-year teaching institutions, faculty and students would benefit from attending events like the Annual
Biomedical Research Conference for Minority Students (https://www.abrcms.org/) or the Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science annual meeting
(https://www.sacnas.org/), which provide pathways for further experiences and networking.
FUND THE FUTURE
Faculty members at UIs have been historically disadvantaged when competing for funding due to the high
teaching load and/or perceived lower research quality, lack of research infrastructure and research personnel,
and stigma associated with reanalyzing existing data, among other reasons (Ginther et al. 2011; Hemming et
al. 2019). Systemic biases also exist due to a lack of understanding of the importance of institutions that enroll
significant numbers of traditionally underrepresented students. While several pivotal funding opportunities for
UIs have emerged in recent years, the GDSCN constituency identified where funding agencies and
philanthropies can prioritize resources. These include funds for faculty networking and knowledge exchange,
CURE development, and cloud computing, alongside ongoing efforts to strengthen research support.
Events where faculty can network and develop collaborations require minimal funds, but are still a major need
among UI faculty (Hemming et al. 2019). Such events have long lasting benefits, as they facilitate novel
research, educational materials, and discovery. Faculty at R1 research institutions can also commit to
contacting UI faculty to submit grant proposals collaboratively, share open access teaching resources, and/or
invite students to participate in external CUREs and other research experiences. Programs can also be
21
enacted to fund R1 faculty research or teaching time at UIs. Going forward, evaluation of larger NIH proposals
could incorporate a Broader Impacts section akin to those required by NSF, where R1 researchers regularly
commit to engaging and collaborating with underrepresented communities. Modest funding could also make a
sizable difference for recruiting outside speakers. Speakers coming from underrepresented groups and/or with
non-traditional backgrounds can often connect more effectively with students of similar backgrounds and
should be encouraged to do so with financial compensation. Grants supporting potential role models could also
be expanded by government agencies, for-profit companies, and philanthropies. Postdoctoral and early career
fellowships are particularly lacking for underrepresented groups.
As mentioned above, there is a much deeper root for the underrepresentation of certain communities in the
field of genomics, which may go back to the scientific education they receive in early K-12 levels, besides
socioeconomic and family factors. Therefore, to increase the participation of the currently underrepresented
communities in the field of genomics, there needs to be greater investment in science and mathematics at the
K-12 grade levels and more activities engaging K-12 students in understanding biology, genomics, and related
sciences. Besides improving the overall education quality and particularly science and mathematics education
in grade schools, federal funding agencies and philanthropies should encourage faculty with expertise in
genomics working at either UIs or R1 universities to provide training to science and mathematics teachers at
high schools, secondary schools, and even primary schools and allow financial support to do so.
The NIH and NSF provide grants for curriculum development, such as the NIH Research Enhancement Award
for small-scale research projects at educational institutions (National Institutes of Health 2021d), the Advancing
Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education
program (National Science Foundation 2021), and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (National Science Foundation 2020). Yet, the percentage of funding granted to UIs
remains very low. Releasing teaching time also requires other faculty to shoulder the released teaching load,
making it difficult to implement these programs without significant funding. Similarly, the successful NSF REU
program (National Science Foundation 2019b) also supports relatively few students, typically only ~10 students
22
per site, which is orders of magnitude smaller than is necessary to give all students an opportunity. Funding
programs that sponsor scalable and accessible CUREs can likely provide greater collective impact (Elgin et al.
2021). Philanthropies and private companies could also consider partnering with UI faculty to fund CURE
modules in specific topic areas.
More generally, funders must support research in underrepresented communities and at UIs. UIs are typically
under much higher economic pressure, making it difficult for faculty to get started with research. First, funders
must consider computing costs as part of the solution. Options include streamlining funding for cloud
computing through programs like NIH Strides and public-private partnerships like the NSF CISE-MSI program
(NSF Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering with support from Google) (Table
S2). Importantly, platforms should consider a free no-strings-attached tier for users where compute hours
regenerate over time. This prevents accidental overspend, makes it easier to get started, and makes practicing
with students simple. While government agencies have been increasing support for UI research in recent
years, companies and private philanthropies can often adopt change more quickly. For example, the Chan
Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) Essential Open Source Software program
(https://chanzuckerberg.com/rfa/essential-open-source-software-for-science/) aims to improve reproducibility
and transparency in biology and medicine while explicitly seeking applications that increase diversity and
inclusion. Biotechnology companies can work directly with UIs to offer support and a path to employment for
students. Other research challenges require creative solutions. For example, UIs often lack institutional journal
access, which could be overcome with sponsorship by R1 institution libraries. Sponsoring staff positions can
also work toward reducing the administrative burden on UI faculty. Funders will need to continue to engage
their target communities to provide usable and meaningful support. The GDSCN has created a growing
database of resources (https://www.gdscn.org/resources) as a starting point for bringing coursework,
development, and funding resources to UIs and their communities.
23
THE GENOMIC DATA SCIENCE COMMUNITY NETWORK VISION
We propose a vision where researchers, educators, and students from diverse backgrounds are able to fully
participate in genomic data science research. Underserved Institutions (UIs) make education more accessible
to students from underrepresented groups. Our strategy is to provide resources that are currently absent at
these key institutions to augment the unique strengths that these institutions already provide. As a first step
towards this vision, we planted the seeds for a Genomic Data Science Community Network (GDSCN) by
bringing together faculty from CCs, HBCUs, HSIs, and TCUs alongside faculty and staff from Johns Hopkins
University and NHGRI. This vision and recommendations in this manuscript represent the culmination of a
year-long process that involved one-on-one virtual meetings, four virtual synchronous events along with
several rounds of asynchronous writing sessions.
In addition to bringing faculty together, the pilot efforts of the GDSCN has also supported tangible resources.
First, we are developing several modules of genomic data science curricula specifically targeted toward UI
student audiences, available at https://www.gdscn.org/curricula/courses. Through NHGRI, GDSCN and other
UI faculty members are provided access to cloud computing credits on the AnVIL platform in order to run these
courses in their classrooms. Simultaneously, we organized a series of symposiums, where we crowdsourced
challenges, needs, and opportunities in the current academic infrastructure as well as barriers that need to be
overcome to enable broader participation and inclusion in genomic data science research. Finally, we initiated
the development of several modules within the Open Case Studies Project (https://www.opencasestudies.org/).
In the future, we hope to grow the network (https://www.gdscn.org/contact-us) to incorporate more
perspectives and support more faculty from UIs to meet their networking, research, and education goals. We
plan to continue iterating on our initiatives via GDSCN faculty surveys. We will likewise record the number of
faculty and students reached in training events, classroom time, and upcoming events (such as grant writing
workshops).
24
More broadly, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has identified four major underrepresented groups whose
participation is needed to increase diversity in biomedical research: racial and ethnic groups, people with
disabilities, people with low socioeconomic status, and women (National Institutes of Health 2019). In this
perspective, we focus on UIs, including Minority Serving Institutions. Our current scope does not specifically
include people with disabilities and women. However, both of these are identities that intersect with UIs. We
expect that the actions discussed here (Figure 2), such as greater access to CUREs, exploration of relevant
research topics and issues, and expanded funding, will be relevant to other underrepresented communities.
However, the GDSCN will need to have direct engagement with women and people with disabilities in the
genomic data science community to determine the best way to leverage their specific strengths and advocate
for their most pressing needs.
In the future, we hope that faculty at R1 institutions—who identify with an underrepresented group or share an
interest in improving the education and research in genomic data science at the institutions serving these
students—will consider lending their perspective to the community and reach out for collaborations with the
faculty and students at these institutions. Ultimately, we are hopeful that these collaborations will empower
scientists to solve key problems, such as the pervasive bias in genomic data collection (Sirugo et al. 2019) and
ongoing challenges with accountability, data sovereignty, community/tribal consent, and data misuse (Hudson
et al. 2020). Although we have limited our initial efforts to institutions in the US, we believe that lessons learned
among the GDSCN will spark discussions in the global research community. We also believe that GDSCN
efforts will be improved by including student and tribal representatives in the conversation (Claw et al. 2021).
Finally, we hope that our insights and materials will encourage scientists and their teams to learn and actively
support UI communities, ultimately improving access, removing barriers, and making science more innovative
and inclusive as a whole.
25
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare no competing interests.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is dedicated to the late James Peter Taylor, the Ralph S. O’Connor Professor of Biology and
Computer Science at Johns Hopkins University, who was one of the original architects of the AnVIL and an
ardent champion for open science (https://galaxyproject.org/jxtx). We also thank B. C. Kamermans for helpful
feedback. The GDSCN is supported through a contract to Johns Hopkins University (75N92020P00235). The
AnVIL is supported through cooperative agreement awards from NHGRI with co-funding from OD/ODSS to the
Broad Institute (#U24HG010262) and Johns Hopkins University (#U24HG010263).
REFERENCES
Auchincloss LC, Laursen SL, Branchaw JL, Eagan K, Graham M, Hanauer DI, Lawrie G, McLinn CM, Pelaez
N, Rowland S, et al. 2014. Assessment of course-based undergraduate research experiences: a meeting
report. CBE Life Sci Educ 13: 29–40.
Bangera G, Brownell SE. 2014. Course-based undergraduate research experiences can make scientific
research more inclusive. CBE Life Sci Educ 13: 602–606.
Boatright T. 2020. The Impact of the College Tour Element Embedded in a High-quality Afterschool Program.
ed. M. Morris., Northeastern University, Ann Arbor, United States
https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/impact-college-tour-element-embedded-high-quality/docvie
w/2395333563/se-2.
Buchwald D, Dick RW. 2011. Weaving the native web: using social network analysis to demonstrate the value
of a minority career development program. Acad Med 86: 778–786.
Canner JE, McEligot AJ, Pérez M-E, Qian L, Zhang X. 2017. Enhancing Diversity in Biomedical Data Science.
Ethn Dis 27: 107–116.
Carpi A, Ronan DM, Falconer HM, Lents NH. 2017. Cultivating minority scientists: Undergraduate research
increases self-efficacy and career ambitions for underrepresented students in STEM. J Res Sci Teach 54:
169–194.
Cheplygina V, Hermans F, Albers C, Bielczyk N, Smeets I. 2020. Ten simple rules for getting started on Twitter
as a scientist. PLoS Comput Biol 16: e1007513.
Clark MH, Cundiff NL. 2011. Assessing the Effectiveness of a College Freshman Seminar Using Propensity
26
Score Adjustments. Res High Educ 52: 616–639.
Claw KG, Dundas N, Parrish MS, Begay RL, Teller TL, Garrison NA, Sage F. 2021. Perspectives on Genetic
Research: Results From a Survey of Navajo Community Members. Front Genet 12: 734529.
Crown SW, Fuentes AA, Freeman RA. 2011. A Successful Plan for Faculty Development that has a Lasting
Impact. In 2011 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, pp. 22.113.1–22.113.15.
Dedrick RM, Guerrero-Bustamante CA, Garlena RA, Russell DA, Ford K, Harris K, Gilmour KC, Soothill J,
Jacobs-Sera D, Schooley RT, et al. 2019. Engineered bacteriophages for treatment of a patient with a
disseminated drug-resistant Mycobacterium abscessus. Nat Med 25: 730–733.
Dinsdale E, Elgin SCR, Grandgenett N, Morgan W, Rosenwald A, Tapprich W, Triplett EW, Pauley MA. 2015.
NIBLSE: A Network for Integrating Bioinformatics into Life Sciences Education. CBE Life Sci Educ 14: le3.
Elgin SCR, Hays S, Mingo V, Shaffer CD, Williams J. 2021. Building Back More Equitable STEM Education:
Teach Science by Engaging Students in Doing Science. bioRxiv 2021.06.01.446616.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.01.446616v1 (Accessed December 17, 2021).
Fuller JA, Luckey S, Odean R, Lang SN. 2021. Creating a diverse, inclusive, and equitable learning
environment to support children of color’s early introductions to STEM. Transl Issues Psychol Sci 7:
473–486.
Garrison NA, Hudson M, Ballantyne LL, Garba I, Martinez A, Taualii M, Arbour L, Caron NR, Rainie SC. 2019.
Genomic Research Through an Indigenous Lens: Understanding the Expectations. Annu Rev Genomics
Hum Genet 20: 495–517.
Gin LE, Clark CE, Elliott DB, Roderick TB, Scott RA, Arellano D, Ramirez D, Vargas C, Velarde K, Aeschliman
A, et al. 2021. An Exploration across Institution Types of Undergraduate Life Sciences Student Decisions
to Stay in or Leave an Academic-Year Research Experience. CBE Life Sci Educ 20: ar47.
Ginther DK, Schaffer WT, Schnell J, Masimore B, Liu F, Haak LL, Kington R. 2011. Race, ethnicity, and NIH
research awards. Science 333: 1015–1019.
Glessner K, Rockinson-Szapkiw AJ, Lopez ML. 2017. “yes, I can”: Testing an intervention to increase middle
school students’ college and career self-efficacy. Career Dev Q 65: 315–325.
Goff SA, Vaughn M, McKay S, Lyons E, Stapleton AE, Gessler D, Matasci N, Wang L, Hanlon M, Lenards A, et
al. 2011. The iPlant Collaborative: Cyberinfrastructure for Plant Biology. Front Plant Sci 2: 34.
Goodwin S, McPherson JD, McCombie WR. 2016. Coming of age: ten years of next-generation sequencing
technologies. Nat Rev Genet 17: 333–351.
Hanauer DI, Graham MJ, SEA-PHAGES, Betancur L, Bobrownicki A, Cresawn SG, Garlena RA, Jacobs-Sera
D, Kaufmann N, Pope WH, et al. 2017. An inclusive Research Education Community (iREC): Impact of the
SEA-PHAGES program on research outcomes and student learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:
13531–13536.
Hemming J, Eide K, Harwood E, Ali R, Zhu Z, Cutler J, National Research Mentoring Network Coaching Group
Directors. 2019. Exploring Professional Development for New Investigators Underrepresented in the
Federally Funded Biomedical Research Workforce. Ethn Dis 29: 123–128.
Hoffmann AA, Weeks AR, Sgrò CM. 2021. Opportunities and challenges in assessing climate change
vulnerability through genomics. Cell 184: 1420–1425.
27
Hofstra B, Kulkarni VV, Munoz-Najar Galvez S, He B, Jurafsky D, McFarland DA. 2020. The
Diversity-Innovation Paradox in Science. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117: 9284–9291.
Hudson M, Garrison NA, Sterling R, Caron NR, Fox K, Yracheta J, Anderson J, Wilcox P, Arbour L, Brown A, et
al. 2020. Rights, interests and expectations: Indigenous perspectives on unrestricted access to genomic
data. Nat Rev Genet 21: 377–384.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. 2001. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human
genome. Nature 409: 860–921.
Jalili V, Afgan E, Gu Q, Clements D, Blankenberg D, Goecks J, Taylor J, Nekrutenko A. 2020. The Galaxy
platform for accessible, reproducible and collaborative biomedical analyses: 2020 update. Nucleic Acids
Res 48: W395–W402.
Jarvis T, Weiman S, Johnson D. 2020. Reimagining scientific conferences during the pandemic and beyond.
Sci Adv 6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abe5815.
Jayabalan M, Caballero ME, Cordero AD, White BM, Asalone KC, Moore MM, Irabor EG, Watkins SE,
Walters-Conte KB, Taraboletti A, et al. 2021. Unrealized potential from smaller institutions: Four strategies
for advancing STEM diversity. Cell 184: 5845–5850.
Jensen AJ, Bombaci SP, Gigliotti LC, Harris SN, Marneweck CJ, Muthersbaugh MS, Newman BA, Rodriguez
SL, Saldo EA, Shute KE, et al. 2021. Attracting Diverse Students to Field Experiences Requires Adequate
Pay, Flexibility, and Inclusion. Bioscience 71: 757–770.
Jordan TC, Burnett SH, Carson S, Caruso SM, Clase K, DeJong RJ, Dennehy JJ, Denver DR, Dunbar D, Elgin
SCR, et al. 2014. A broadly implementable research course in phage discovery and genomics for first-year
undergraduate students. MBio 5: e01051–13.
Khoury MJ, Armstrong GL, Bunnell RE, Cyril J, Iademarco MF. 2020. The intersection of genomics and big
data with public health: Opportunities for precision public health. PLoS Med 17: e1003373.
Kokotsaki D, Menzies V, Wiggins A. 2016. Project-based learning: A review of the literature. Improving Schools
19: 267–277.
Krim JS, Coté LE, Schwartz RS, Stone EM, Cleeves JJ, Barry KJ, Burgess W, Buxner SR, Gerton JM, Horvath
L, et al. 2019. Models and Impacts of Science Research Experiences: A Review of the Literature of
CUREs, UREs, and TREs. CBE Life Sci Educ 18: ar65.
Kross S, Peng RD, Caffo BS, Gooding I, Leek JT. 2020. The democratization of data science education. Am
Stat 74: 1–7.
Lee J. 2019. Microbiome CRE Wiki. GitHub.
https://github.com/joslynnlee/qiime2-workflow-cyverse/wiki/For-Faculty:-Teaching-Instructions (Accessed
April 14, 2022).
Lindberg RSN, Laine TH, Haaranen L. 2019. Gamifying programming education in K‐12: A review of
programming curricula in seven countries and programming games. Br J Educ Technol 50: 1979–1995.
Li X, Carroll CD. 2007. Characteristics of Minority-Serving Institutions and Minority Undergraduates Enrolled in
These Institutions: Postsecondary Education Descriptive Analysis Report (NCES 2008-156). National
Center for Education Statistics. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED499114.
Lopatto D, Hauser C, Jones CJ, Paetkau D, Chandrasekaran V, Dunbar D, MacKinnon C, Stamm J, Alvarez C,
Barnard D, et al. 2014. A central support system can facilitate implementation and sustainability of a
28
Classroom-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in Genomics. CBE Life Sci Educ 13:
711–723.
Manolio TA, Rowley R, Williams MS, Roden D, Ginsburg GS, Bult C, Chisholm RL, Deverka PA, McLeod HL,
Mensah GA, et al. 2019. Opportunities, resources, and techniques for implementing genomics in clinical
care. Lancet 394: 511–520.
Mapes BM, Foster CS, Kusnoor SV, Epelbaum MI, AuYoung M, Jenkins G, Lopez-Class M, Richardson-Heron
D, Elmi A, Surkan K, et al. 2020. Diversity and inclusion for the All of Us research program: A scoping
review. PLoS One 15: e0234962.
McCormick AC, Zhao C-M. 2005. Rethinking and reframing the carnegie classification. Change: The Magazine
of Higher Learning 37: 51–57.
Merchant N, Lyons E, Goff S, Vaughn M, Ware D, Micklos D, Antin P. 2016. The iPlant Collaborative:
Cyberinfrastructure for Enabling Data to Discovery for the Life Sciences. PLoS Biol 14: e1002342.
Merisotis JP, McCarthy K. 2005. Retention and student success at minority-serving institutions. New Dir Inst
Res 2005: 45–58.
Morgan PL, Farkas G, Hillemeier MM, Maczuga S. 2016. Science Achievement Gaps Begin Very Early,
Persist, and Are Largely Explained by Modifiable Factors. Educational Researcher 45: 18–35.
National Center for Biotechnology Information. 2021. SRA Growth. Sequence Read Archive (SRA).
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sragrowth/ (Accessed December 7, 2021).
National Institutes of Health. 2021a. Bridges to the Baccalaureate Research Training Program (T34). Bridges
to the Baccalaureate Research Training Program (T34).
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-19-299.html (Accessed December 17, 2021).
National Institutes of Health. 2021b. IDeA Networks of Biomedical Research Excellence. IDeA Networks of
Biomedical Research Excellence. https://www.nigms.nih.gov/research/drcb/IDeA/Pages/INBRE.aspx
(Accessed 2021).
National Institutes of Health. 2021c. NHGRI creates Office of Training, Diversity and Health Equity. NHGRI
creates Office of Training, Diversity and Health Equity.
https://www.genome.gov/news/news-release/NHGRI-creates-office-of-training-diversity-and-health-equity
(Accessed December 8, 2021).
National Institutes of Health. 2021d. NIH Research Enhancement Award (R15). Grants & Funding.
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/funding/r15.htm (Accessed December 7, 2021).
National Institutes of Health. 2019. Notice of NIH’s Interest in Diversity. Grants & Funding.
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-20-031.html (Accessed December 7, 2021).
National Science Foundation. 2021. Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at
Two-year Institutions of Higher Education. Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education.
https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/advancing-innovation-and-impact-undergraduate-stem-education
-two-year (Accessed October 6, 2021).
National Science Foundation. 2017a. Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology. Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology.
https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/centers-research-excellence-science-and-technology (Accessed
2021).
29
National Science Foundation. 2020. Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
(HBCU-UP). Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).
https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/historically-black-colleges-and-universities-undergraduate-progra
m-hbcu (Accessed January 9, 2022).
National Science Foundation. 2019a. NSF: Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and
Engineering: 2019. National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf19304/data (Accessed December 6, 2021).
National Science Foundation. 2017b. Research Coordination Networks. Research Coordination Networks.
https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/research-coordination-networks (Accessed December 7, 2021).
National Science Foundation. 2019b. Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU).
https://beta.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/research-experiences-undergraduates-reu (Accessed December
7, 2021).
Navale V, Bourne PE. 2018. Cloud computing applications for biomedical science: A perspective. PLoS
Comput Biol 14: e1006144.
Nguyen T-H, Lundy-Wagner V, Samayoa A, Gasman M. 2015. On their own terms: Two-year minority serving
institutions. https://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1389&context=gse_pubs.
Rawlings-Goss R. 2019. Data science careers, training, and hiring: A comprehensive guide to the data
ecosystem: How to build a successful data science career, program, or unit. 1st ed. Springer Nature,
Cham, Switzerland.
Robbins SM, Daulton CR, Hurle B, Easter C. 2021. The NHGRI Short Course in Genomics: energizing
genetics and genomics education in classrooms through direct engagement between educators and
scientists. Genet Med 23: 222–229.
Rowan College at Burlington County. 2021. 3 + 1 Program at Rowan College. 3 + 1 Program at Rowan
College. https://www.rcbc.edu/rowan/3plus1 (Accessed 2021).
Ryder EF, Morgan WR, Sierk M, Donovan SS, Robertson SD, Orndorf HC, Rosenwald AG, Triplett EW,
Dinsdale E, Pauley MA, et al. 2020. Incubators: Building community networks and developing open
educational resources to integrate bioinformatics into life science education. Biochem Mol Biol Educ 48:
381–390.
Savonen C, Wright C, Hoffman AM, Muschelli J, Cox K, Tan FJ, Leek JT. 2022. Open-source Tools for Training
Resources -- OTTR. https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.07083.
Schatz MC, Philippakis AA, Afgan E, Banks E, Carey VJ, Carroll RJ, Culotti A, Ellrott K, Goecks J, Grossman
RL, et al. 2021. Inverting the model of genomics data sharing with the NHGRI Genomic Data Science
Analysis, Visualization, and Informatics Lab-space (AnVIL). bioRxiv 2021.04.22.436044.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.22.436044v1 (Accessed May 5, 2021).
Sirugo G, Williams SM, Tishkoff SA. 2019. The Missing Diversity in Human Genetic Studies. Cell 177: 26–31.
Stich AE, Reeves TD. 2017. Massive open online courses and underserved students in the United States.
Internet High Educ 32: 58–71.
Sweeder R, Kursav MN, Valles S. 2021. A Cohort Scholarship Program that Reduces Inequities in STEM
retention. JSTEM 22. https://jstem.org/jstem/index.php/JSTEM/article/view/2456 (Accessed January 9,
2022).
30
Texas Education Agency. 2020. Early College High School (ECHS). Early College High School (ECHS).
https://tea.texas.gov/academics/college-career-and-military-prep/early-college-high-school-echs
(Accessed December 17, 2021).
Virginia Community Colleges. 2020. High School Dual Enrollment. High School Dual Enrollment.
https://www.vccs.edu/high-school-dual-enrollment/ (Accessed December 17, 2021).
Whittaker JA, Montgomery BL, Martinez Acosta VG. 2015. Retention of underrepresented minority faculty:
Strategic initiatives for institutional value proposition based on perspectives from a range of academic
institutions. J Undergrad Neurosci Educ 13: A136–45.
Wiley K, Dixon BE, Grannis SJ, Menachemi N. 2020. Underrepresented racial minorities in biomedical
informatics doctoral programs: graduation trends and academic placement (2002-2017). J Am Med Inform
Assoc 27: 1641–1647.
Williams JJ, Drew JC, Galindo-Gonzalez S, Robic S, Dinsdale E, Morgan WR, Triplett EW, Burnette JM 3rd,
Donovan SS, Fowlks ER, et al. 2019. Barriers to integration of bioinformatics into undergraduate life
sciences education: A national study of US life sciences faculty uncover significant barriers to integrating
bioinformatics into undergraduate instruction. PLoS One 14: e0224288.
Wilson Sayres MA, Hauser C, Sierk M, Robic S, Rosenwald AG, Smith TM, Triplett EW, Williams JJ, Dinsdale
E, Morgan WR, et al. 2018. Bioinformatics core competencies for undergraduate life sciences education.
PLoS One 13: e0196878.
Winkle-Wagner R, McCoy DL. 2018. Feeling like an “Alien” or “Family”? Comparing students and faculty
experiences of diversity in STEM disciplines at a PWI and an HBCU. Race Ethnicity and Education 21:
593–606.
Xie X, Lewis T-J, Green N, Wang Z. 2021. Phylogenetic network analysis revealed the recombinant origin of
the SARS-CoV-2 VOC202012/01 (B.1.1.7) variant first discovered in U.K. bioRxiv 2021.06.24.449840.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.24.449840v2 (Accessed January 9, 2022).
Yarmohammadian MH, Davidson P, Yeh CH. 2018. Sabbatical as a part of the academic excellence journey: A
narrative qualitative study. J Educ Health Promot 7: 119.
Zhan YA, Wray CG, Namburi S, Glantz ST, Laubenbacher R, Chuang JH. 2019. Fostering bioinformatics
education through skill development of professors: Big Genomic Data Skills Training for Professors. PLoS
Comput Biol 15: e1007026.
Zook M, Barocas S, Boyd D, Crawford K, Keller E, Gangadharan SP, Goodman A, Hollander R, Koenig BA,
Metcalf J, et al. 2017. Ten simple rules for responsible big data research. PLoS Comput Biol 13:
e1005399.
31
Supplemental information to accompany:
Diversifying the Genomic Data Science Research Community
Text S1: Faculty and staff at UIs (Underserved Institutions) possess unique strengths and have experience
with the specific interests, needs, challenges, and concerns of the populations they serve. We briefly describe
these unique attributes below.
● Community Colleges (CCs) have smaller class sizes at the freshman and sophomore levels and
provide unique student-centered support (Holmberg et al. 2021). Tuition at CCs is extremely affordable
compared to public universities (on average only one third the cost), and flexible class schedules
accommodate working students. CCs tend to be more agile in responding to the needs of the
community and provide support to traditional and non-traditional students alike, often supplying more
personalized attention. CCs promote a culture of inclusion and innovation while making higher
education more accessible to individuals across socioeconomic groups. Large teaching loads (e.g., 4
lectures and 3 labs per semester) with no release time are typical for CC faculty. Research laboratories,
equipment, and funds for laboratory supplies are limited or completely absent, making experimental
work extremely challenging, but data science offers an exciting opportunity.
● Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) are incredibly diverse and include institutions
that focus on liberal arts, business, professional degrees, workforce development, or cutting-edge
research. HBCUs have been key to increasing participation and success of minority students in STEM
(Gasman and Nguyen 2016) and provide an affordable, supportive learning environment for minority
student achievement (Harper 2019). HBCUs serve as pillars of Black and African American history, art,
culture, and politics, attracting an extremely diverse student body and faculty community. However, the
legacy of slavery, segregation, and systemic social discrimination means that HBCUs tend to have
financial challenges (Harper 2019). Some faculty members at HBCUs are developing new federally
funded education and research programs to provide students training in genomics and data sciences.
However, the long-term success of these programs requires wider acceptance by HBCU faculty
colleagues and support from administrations in the form of teaching release time, compensation,
technical personnel, and adequate genomics and data science research facilities.
● Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) provide an essential resource making education accessible to
the nation’s growing population of Hispanic Americans. HSIs enroll two-thirds of all Hispanic
undergraduates and are among the top institutions with respect to the Social Mobility Index (SMI)
(Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities 2021). Students choose HSIs for their exceptional
affordability and proximity to home and family (Cuellar 2019). Like HBCUs, HSIs are under-resourced.
These diverse institutions receive only 68 cents for every federal funding dollar granted to all other
institutions per student annually (Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities 2021)).
● Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) provide culturally relevant, geographically accessible, and
affordable higher education. Indigenous ways of thinking bring diverse perspectives and solutions to
health and environmental questions. TCUs are centered around the communities they serve, forming
bridges to meaningful community engagement. Outside collaborations with TCUs must be flexible,
reciprocal, and culturally sensitive. TCUs and affiliated tribal communities require engagement through
every step of the research and data sharing process (Hudson et al. 2020). Indigenous scientists are
wary of “helicopter research”; collaborations should create meaningful educational and training
materials that can lead to co-publication and co-presentation (Guglielmi 2019; Fox 2020). Activities
should be sustainable and empowering for TCU faculty. Academic researchers engaged in tribal
projects should become familiar with tribal sovereignty and ethics and informed consent (Garrison et al.
2019) as well as community education around genetics (Claw et al. 2021). Collaborative research
projects and training opportunities may focus on tribal health or environmental priorities. TCUs are
continuing to work on their technology and internet infrastructure to increase access in remote areas.
Table S1: Organizations supporting the needs of underserved subpopulations have emerged in recent years.
These groups are vital to developing a sense of belonging and support system. Some examples of these
affinity groups include those listed here.
Organization Website
Center for First-generation Student Success https://firstgen.naspa.org/
Student Veterans Research Network https://www.svrn.org/
Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native https://www.sacnas.org/
Americans in Science
American Indian Science and Engineering Society https://www.aises.org/
Native BioData Consortium https://indigidata.nativebio.org/
Annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority Students https://abrcms.org/
National Foster Youth Institute https://nfyi.org/issues/higher-education/
From Prison Cells to PhD https://www.fromprisoncellstophd.org/
Table S2: Cloud-based computing resources. Note that other tools, such as JupyterHub
(https://jupyter.org/hub#deploy-a-jupyterhub) and Binder (https://mybinder.org/), can also make it easier to
deploy notebooks for multiple users on commercially available clouds using Kubernetes. The Galaxy Server
Directory (https://galaxyproject.org/use/) also includes a comprehensive list of more cloud providers providing
access to Galaxy. Combinations of open source software (e.g., Docker and R,
https://www.docker.com/blog/docker-higher-education-tools-resources-teachers/) can also provide an
alternative for modular teaching needs. Online resources change frequently; this information was collected on
Dec 7, 2021.
Resource Interface Costs Strengths /
Weaknesses
Project Specific
AnVIL / Terra Terra portal for launching cloud Computestarting at $0.06 per Strengths:Collaborative
https://anvilproject.org/learn environments with workflows, hr; possible to obtain $300 in work on sensitive/protected
Jupyter Notebook, RStudio, credits through Google Cloud and NHGRI datasets, many
Galaxy, and Command Line Persistent disk$4.00 per options for different
Interface; hosts open and month per 100GB experience levels, extremely
controlled NHGRI datasets scalable
Weaknesses:Lacks a free
tier for beginners
Terra portal that includes analysis Computestarting at $0.06 per Strengths:Access and
workspaces and Jupyter hr; possible to obtain $300 in ability to build datasets, built
Notebook; hosts open and credits through Google Cloud in analysis spaces
All of Us protected tier for All of Us Persistent disk$4.00 per Weaknesses:Lacks a free
https://www.researchallofus.o Research Program participant month per 100GB tier for beginners
rg/ data
Terra and Seven Bridges portal Computecosts vary depending Strengths:Access to
that includes analysis workflows on AWS instance used; possible datasets, built in
and RStudio and Jupyter to obtain $500 in credits workflows/pipelines
BioData Catalyst Notebook; hosts protected NHLBI Persistent disk$2.10 per Weaknesses:Lacks a free
https://biodatacatalyst.nhlbi.n datasets month per 100GB through tier for beginners
ih.gov Seven Bridges
Terra, Seven Bridges, and ComputeandPersistent disk Strengths:Access to
ISB-CGC portal that includes costs vary depending on datasets, built in
analysis workflows, genomic tools, platform used, possible to obtain workflows/pipelines, flexible
Cancer Research Data
RStudio, and Jupyter Notebook; $300 in credits through Google with many options for
Commons hosts open and controlled Cloud different experience levels
https://datacommons.cancer. datasets from NCI programs and Weaknesses:Lacks a free
gov/ key external cancer programs tier for beginners
Storage, sharing, and analysis Computecosts vary depending Strengths:Access to
portal supported by Cavatica / on AWS instance used; possible datasets, built in
Seven Bridges with workflows and to obtain $500 in credits workflows/pipelines
genomics apps; hosts open and Persistent disk$2.10 per Weaknesses:Lacks a free
Kids First DRC controlled datasets month per 100GB through tier for beginners, less
https://kidsfirstdrc.org Seven Bridges flexibility
UK Biobank DNANexus portal for launching ComputeandPersistent disk Strengths:Access to
https://ukbiobank.dnanexus.c cloud environments with costs vary depending on AWS datasets, flexible with many
om/landing workflows, JupyterLab, Command instance used; users start with options for analysis
Line Interface, or custom tools; approximately $50 in free Weaknesses:Learning
hosts the UK Biobank dataset compute and storage credit curve might be steeper
compared to other platforms
Academic
CyVerse Launching platform for maintained Computefree with Strengths:Affordable, many
https://learning.cyverse.org/ images, including those with short/moderate wait times with options for different
bioInformatics tools, Jupyter subscriptions available experience levels
Notebook, RStudio, and Galaxy Persistent diskfree up to Weaknesses:Requires
100GB, starting at $100 per TB permission to access
per year for >100GB. resources
Galaxy Point-and-click for commonly used Computefree tier limited to 6 Strengths:No programming
https://training.galaxyprojec genomics tools compute jobs for registered experience needed, powerful
t.org/ users, 1 for unregistered users workflows, free for basic
(short/moderate wait times) analyses
Persistent diskfree tier limited Weaknesses:Wait
to 250GB for registered users, times/limits, limited to tools
5GB for unregistered users available
GenePattern Point-and-click for commonly used Computefree tier with Strengths:No programming
https://www.genepattern.or genomics tools, plus Jupyter short/moderate wait times experience needed, free for
g/user-guide(Reich et al. Notebook Persistent diskfreepublic basic analyses
2006) server limited to 30GB. Weaknesses:limited to
tools available, less active
user community
Jetstream Launching platform for maintained Computefree tier up to50,000 Strengths:Affordable, many
https://jetstream-cloud.org/d images, includingthose with Virtual CPU Hours options for different
ocumentation-training/index bioInformatics tools, R, Galaxy, Persistent diskallocations experience levels
.html(Stewart et al. 2015) and more provided on a per-project basis; Weaknesses:Requires
Allocation requests for permission to access
education and research resources
available
(https://docs.jetstream-cloud.org
/faq/alloc/).
KBase Point-and-click for commonly used Computefree tier with Strengths:Easy start on
https://www.kbase.us/learn/ genomics tools, plus Jupyter short/moderate wait times. free tier, No programming
(Arkin et al. 2018) Notebook Persistent diskhas no strict experience needed
storage limits Weaknesses:Less flexible,
limited to tools available
SciServer Launching platform for maintained Computefree tier with Strengths:Access to large
https://www.sciserver.org/su images, includingthose with short/moderate wait times datasets, flexible with many
pport/(Taghizadeh-Popp et bioInformatics tools, R, python, Persistent diskfree up to options for analysis; great
al. 2020) and more; hosts datasets 10GB permanent storage; option for collaborating with
temporary storage at 1TB+ physicists and other
multidisciplinary team
members
Weaknesses:Learning
curve might be steeper
compared to other platforms
Commercial
Illumina BaseSpace Point-and-click for commonly used Computewith limited free basic Strengths:Built-in
https://basespace.illumina.c genomics tools tier; credits can be purchased workflows, collaborative
om/ Persistent diskfree tier limited work on sensitive/protected
to 1TB; credits can be datasets
purchased Weaknesses:Less flexible,
more expensive than others
Google Colaboratory Jupyter notebook (Python) Computefree tier resources are Strengths:Easy start on
https://colab.research.googl limited, usage limits fluctuate free tier, Quickly code live
e.com/ Persistent diskfree up to 5GB with other users
Weaknesses:Connection
and RAMnot guaranteed,
limited languages/tools
RStudio Cloud RStudio accessed through Computefree tier up to 25 Strengths:Easy start on
https://rstudio.cloud/ browser hours, paid tier $0.10 per hour free tier
Persistent diskfree tier limited Weaknesses:limited to R
to 20GB per project based languages/tools
Seven Bridges Point-and-click for commonly used ComputeandPersistent disk Strengths:Flexible and
https://www.sevenbridges.c genomics tools, RStudio, prices determined by AWS scalable, with built in
om/platform/ command line interface negotiated price genomics tools, relatively
affordable
Weaknesses:No free tier
for beginners
Table S3: Learning resources to supplement courses in genomic data science. MOOC: Massive online open
course. If needed, subscription or paid services should be covered by funding sources.
Description Resource
Standalone MOOC / Course for genomic data ● Coursera Genomic Data Science Specialization
science
(https://www.coursera.org/specializations/genomic-data-science)
● Bioinformatics Algorithms (https://www.bioinformaticsalgorithms.org/)
Project based learning modules (open source) ● Open Case Studies Project (https://www.opencasestudies.org/)
Lesson planning network; modules focused on ● Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and Synthesis Hub
bioinformatics and data science (open source)
(QUBES,https://qubeshub.org/publications/browse)(Donovan et al.
2015)
Modular training for genetics, genomics, and ● CyVerse tutorials (https://learning.cyverse.org/en/latest/tutorials.html)
bioinformatics (open source)
● Galaxy Training Network (https://training.galaxyproject.org/)
● Orchestra (http://app.orchestra.cancerdatasci.org/)
● Babraham Institute bioinformatics courses
(https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/training.html)
● XBio Cell Biology & Genetics
(https://explorebiology.org/collections/genetics)
Modular training for data science (open source) ● Tidyverse Skills for Data Science in R
(https://leanpub.com/tidyverseskillsdatascience)
● Learn-R (https://www.learn-r.org/)
● Swirl (https://swirlstats.com/)
● R for Data Science (https://r4ds.had.co.nz/)
● Data Science in Practice (https://datascienceinpractice.github.io/)
(Donoghue, Voytek, and Ellis 2021)
● The Carpentries (https://carpentries.org/)
● SciServer Courseware (https://www.sciserver.org/outreach/)
● Python for Biologists (https://www.pythonforbiologists.org/)
Modular training (fee- or subscription-based) ● DataQuest (https://www.dataquest.io/)
● Codecademy (https://www.codecademy.com)
● Data Camp (https://www.datacamp.com/)
● SimBio (https://simbio.com/)
Modular training for K-12 ● DataNuggets (http://datanuggets.org/)(Schultheisand Kjelvik 2015)
● DataSpire (https://dataspire.org)
● Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education
(https://orise.orau.gov/resources/k12/lesson-plans.html)
● YouCubed (https://www.youcubed.org/)
Table S4: List of courses and topics which could be included in an accredited degree program, based on the
St. Mary’s University B.S. in Bioinformatics. Prerequisites include General Biology for Majors, General
Chemistry, and Calculus I; corequisites include Fundamentals of programming/software development and
General Physics. For more information, see
https://catalog.stmarytx.edu/undergraduate/majors-programs/science-engineering-technology/bioinformatics/bi
oinformatics-bl/#degreeplantext
Course name Topics Learning Objectives
Introduction to Bioinformatics Basics of genomics and The objective of this course is to teach how
(w/lab) bioinformatics computational techniques can help with solving
Human genome and browser biological problems. Students will learn to efficiently
Pairwise Sequence alignment use multiple genomics and bioinformatics tools, that
Multiple Sequence alignment are freely available, for the analysis of DNA, RNA and
Sequence Database Search protein sequences and structure. No programming
Sequence polymorphism skills are necessary for this course.
Phylogenetic analysis
Gene finding/prediction
RNA sequences: prediction and
analysis of structures
Biostatistics for Life Sciences How to use R for data analysis. This course will provide the background and
Samples and Populations application of statistical tools for analyzing different
Linear Regression types of data frequently encountered by life scientists.
Comparison of Groups The emphasis will be on the applications of various
The Normal Distribution statistical methodologies on biological data, using the
Statistical Models, Estimation, and R programming language.
Confidence Intervals
Hypothesis Tests
Probabilities
The Binomial Distribution
Logistic Regression
Survival Analysis
Genes, Genomes, and Genomics From Genes to Genomes: basic
The objective of this course is to teach students the
(w/lab) molecular biology
basics of molecular biology. The focus of this course
How to clone a gene
will be on genes, genomes and genomics. This will
Genomic and cDNA Libraries
include strategies to clone a gene and prepare
Polymerase Chain Reaction
genomic and cDNA libraries. Students will learn the
Sequencing a Cloned Gene
basics of DNA sequencing. They will also learn to
Analysis of Gene Expression
analyze gene expression. The course will also focus
Products from Native and
on analysis of genomes and genetic variation.
Manipulated Cloned Genes
Students will also learn about transgenesis.
Genomic Analysis
Analysis of Genetic Variation
Transgenesis
Transcriptomics, Proteomics, and DNA microarray technology
The objective of this course is to teach students the
Metabolomics (w/lab) Challenges and Future Trends in
fundamental aspects of the new instrumental and
DNA Microarray Analysis
methodological developments in omics technologies,
Next Generation Sequencing: New
including those related to genomics, transcriptomics,
Tools
epigenetics, proteomics and metabolomics. The focus
Overview of Quantitative Proteomic
of this course will be on DNA microarray analysis,
Approaches
next-generation sequencing technologies,
Overview of Protein Microarrays
genome-wide analysis of methylation and histone
Transcriptome and Metabolome
modifications. Students will learn emerging techniques
Data Integration
in proteomics and recent quantitative proteomics
Identification of Biomarkers and
approaches. They will also learn the basics of
Biochemical Pathway Visualization
metabolomics and metabolome analysis. The course
Functional Glycomics Analysis:
will also focus on statistical approaches for the
Challenges and Methodologies
analysis of microarray data, the integration of
Applications of Glycan Microarrays
transcriptome and metabolome data and
to Functional Glycomics
computational approaches for visualization and
Bioinformatic Analysis of Gene
integration of omics data.
Expression Data
Transcriptome and Metabolome
Data Integration
Algorithms for Computational Linux for bioinformatics
The objective of this course is to teach students the
Biology with PERL/Python Getting started with Perl/Python
basics of theLinux environment and PERL scripting.
Individual approaches to
Students will learn how to write PERL scripts for
programming
solving biological problems. The focus of this course
Representing and Manipulating
will be on designing algorithms to manipulate and
sequence data
analyze sequence data. This will include programming
Using PERL/Python documentation
strategies to store and concatenate DNA sequences.
Motifs and Loops
Writing scripts to generate complementary and
Operating Strings and Arrays
reverse complementary sequences. Students will
Regular expressions
learn how to work with files and arrays. They will also
Hashes and Data Structures
learn to generate random numbers and simulate DNA
Creating Subroutines
mutations. The course will also focus on hashes and
data structures.
Programming for Bioinformatics with DNA Sequence Statistics
The objective of this course is to teach students
R Sequence Databases
bioinformatics programming techniques using R. The
Pairwise Sequence Alignment
focus of this course will be on development of
Multiple Alignment and Phylogenetic
programs to perform commonly used bioinformatics
trees
techniques like pairwise and multiple sequence
Computational Gene-finding
alignments. Students will learn computational
Comparative Genomics
gene-finding and comparative genomic techniques.
Hidden Markov Models
They will also learn to create phylogenetic trees and
Protein-Protein Interaction Graphs
protein-protein interaction graphs. Students will also
learn about Hidden Markov models.
Big Data Concepts Basic Big Data Concepts
The objective of this course is to teach students the
Linux for Big Data Analysis
basic big data concepts. The focus of this course will
Python for Big Data Analysis
be on big data analysis. Students will learn emerging
R for Big Data Analysis
techniques in proteomics and recent quantitative
Genome-Seq Data Analysis
proteomics approaches. They will also learn the
RNA-Seq Data Analysis
basics of the platforms and programming languages
Microbiome-Seq Data Analysis
used for big data analysis. The course will also focus
miRNA-Seq Data Analysis
on the analysis of Genome-, RNA-, miRNA-,
ChIP-Seq Data Analysis
Microbiome- and ChIP-sequencing data. Students will
Big Data and Drug Discovery
also learn about the usage of big data in drug
discovery.
Bioinformatics Internship 120 hrs of documented internship or
The objective of this course is to provide an
research.
opportunity for students in Bioinformatics major to
participate in real-life bioinformatics internship or
research. This course will be for seniors and juniors.
Emphasis will be placed on commonly used
genomics/transcriptomics/proteomics/metabolomics
projects and the use of standard operating
laboratory/industry procedures. Examples of potential
collaborative organizations include medical/health
centers, molecular genomics labs/companies,
computational biology labs/companies, software
development/labs companies and biostatistics
labs/companies.
Bioinformatics Capstone Thesis -
The objective of this integrative Capstone is to provide
Prior to the end of the semester,
students with an opportunity to write a thesis on their
write and submit a 25-30 page,
research and present it in the form of an oral
double-spaced summary of the
presentation. This course will promote advanced
research to the capstone instructor.
scientific writing and broad perspectives of issues in
This will include an abstract,
current Bioinformatics research. Students will
introduction, materials and methods,
demonstrate their ability to integrate concepts to a
results and discussion and
practical situation by presenting a thesis on the
conclusion and references.
research they have performed in an industrial or
The thesis should have at least 3
academic setting. The capstone must be taken during
figures with legends and
the senior year.
descriptions.
Oral presentation
A 20 minutes’ powerpoint
presentation consisting of a
minimum of 20 slides
Oral presentation will be on the
same research that is presented in
the thesis
5 minutes of Question and Answer
sessions with peers and faculty
members
References
Arkin, Adam P., Robert W. Cottingham, Christopher S. Henry, Nomi L. Harris, Rick L. Stevens, Sergei Maslov,
Paramvir Dehal, et al. 2018. “KBase: The United States Department of Energy Systems Biology
Knowledgebase.” Nature Biotechnology 36 (7): 566–69.
Claw, Katrina G., Nicolas Dundas, Michael S. Parrish, Rene L. Begay, Travis L. Teller, Nanibaa’ A. Garrison,
and Franklin Sage. 2021. “Perspectives on Genetic Research: Results From a Survey of Navajo
Community Members.” Frontiers in Genetics 12 (December): 734529.
Cuellar, Marcela G. 2019. “Creating Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) and Emerging HSIs: Latina/o College
Choice at 4-Year Institutions.” American Journal of Education 125 (2): 231–58.
Donoghue, Thomas, Bradley Voytek, and Shannon E. Ellis. 2021. “Teaching Creative and Practical Data
Science at Scale.” Journal of Statistics and Data Science Education 29 (sup1): S27–39.
Donovan, Sam, Carrie Diaz Eaton, Stith T. Gower, Kristin P. Jenkins, M. Drew LaMar, Dorothybelle Poli, Robert
Sheehy, and Jeremy M. Wojdak. 2015. “QUBES: A Community Focused on Supporting Teaching and
Learning in Quantitative Biology.” Letters in Biomathematics 2 (1): 46–55.
Fox, Keolu. 2020. “The Illusion of Inclusion - The ‘All of Us’ Research Program and Indigenous Peoples’ DNA.”
The New England Journal of Medicine 383 (5): 411–13.
Garrison, Nanibaa’ A., Māui Hudson, Leah L. Ballantyne, Ibrahim Garba, Andrew Martinez, Maile Taualii, Laura
Arbour, Nadine R. Caron, and Stephanie Carroll Rainie. 2019. “Genomic Research Through an Indigenous
Lens: Understanding the Expectations.” Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 20 (August):
495–517.
Gasman, Marybeth, and Thai-Huy Nguyen. 2016. “Engaging Voices: Methods for Studying STEM Education at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).” Journal for Multicultural Education 10 (2): 194–205.
Guglielmi, Giorgia. 2019. “Facing up to Injustice in Genome Science.” Nature 568 (7752): 290–93.
Harper, Brian E. 2019. “African American Access to Higher Education: The Evolving Role of Historically Black
Colleges and Universities.” American Academic 3 (January). http://hdl.handle.net/10919/86971.
Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities. 2021. “2021 Hispanic Higher Education and HSIs Facts.”
Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities. April 6, 2021.
https://www.hacu.net/hacu/HSI_Fact_Sheet.asp.
Holmberg, Tara Jo, Sharon Gusky, Stacey Kiser, Vedham Karpakakunjaram, Heather Seitz, Linnea Fletcher,
Lindsey Fields, Apryl Nenortas, Andrew Corless, and Katrina Marcos. 2021. “Biology Educators,
Professional Societies, and Practitioner Networks within Community Colleges.” New Directions for
Community Colleges 2021 (194): 15–28.
Hudson, Maui, Nanibaa’ A. Garrison, Rogena Sterling, Nadine R. Caron, Keolu Fox, Joseph Yracheta, Jane
Anderson, et al. 2020. “Rights, Interests and Expectations: Indigenous Perspectives on Unrestricted
Access to Genomic Data.” Nature Reviews. Genetics 21 (6): 377–84.
Reich, Michael, Ted Liefeld, Joshua Gould, Jim Lerner, Pablo Tamayo, and Jill P. Mesirov. 2006. “GenePattern
2.0.” Nature Genetics 38 (5): 500–501.
Schultheis, Elizabeth H., and Melissa K. Kjelvik. 2015. “Data Nuggets.” The American Biology Teacher 77 (1):
19–29.
Stewart, Craig A., George Turner, Matthew Vaughn, Niall I. Gaffney, Timothy M. Cockerill, Ian Foster, David
Hancock, et al. 2015. “Jetstream.” In Proceedings of the 2015 XSEDE Conference on Scientific
Advancements Enabled by Enhanced Cyberinfrastructure - XSEDE ’15. New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/2792745.2792774.
Taghizadeh-Popp, M., J. W. Kim, G. Lemson, D. Medvedev, M. J. Raddick, A. S. Szalay, A. R. Thakar, et al.
2020. “SciServer: A Science Platform for Astronomy and beyond.” Astronomy and Computing 33
(100412): 100412.
