IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 1
Dual Accuracy-Quality-Driven Neural Network for
Prediction Interval Generation
Giorgio Morales, Member, IEEE, and John W. Sheppard, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Accurate uncertainty quantification is necessary to such as computer vision, speech recognition, natural language
enhance the reliability of deep learning models in real-world processing, medical diagnosis, and others [1].
applications. In the case of regression tasks, prediction intervals
While the undeniable success of deep learning (DL) has
(PIs)shouldbeprovidedalongwiththedeterministicpredictions
impacted applications that are used on a daily basis, many
of deep learning models. Such PIs are useful or “high-quality”
as long as they are sufficiently narrow and capture most of theoreticalaspectsremainunclear,whichiswhythesemodels
the probability density. In this paper, we present a method to areusuallyreferredtoas“blackboxes”intheliterature[2].In
learn prediction intervals for regression-based neural networks addition,numerousreportssuggestthatcurrentDLtechniques
automatically in addition to the conventional target predictions.
typically lead to unstable predictions that can occur randomly
Inparticular,wetraintwocompanionneuralnetworks:onethat
and not only in worst-case scenarios [3]. As a consequence,
uses one output, the target estimate, and another that uses two
outputs, the upper and lower bounds of the corresponding PI. they are considered unreliable for applications that deal with
Our main contribution is the design of a novel loss function for uncertainty in the data or in the underlying system, such
the PI-generation network that takes into account the output as weather forecasting [4], electronic manufacturing [5], or
of the target-estimation network and has two optimization
precision agriculture [6]. Note that, in this context, reliability
objectives: minimizing the mean prediction interval width and
isdefinedastheabilityforamodeltoworkconsistentlyacross
ensuringthePIintegrityusingconstraintsthatmaximizethepre-
dictionintervalprobabilitycoverageimplicitly.Furthermore,we real-world settings [7].
introduceaself-adaptivecoefficientthatbalancesbothobjectives One of the limitations of conventional neural networks is
within the loss function, which alleviates the task of fine-tuning. that they only provide deterministic point estimates without
Experimentsusingasyntheticdataset,eightbenchmarkdatasets,
any additional indication of their approximate accuracy [8].
and a real-world crop yield prediction dataset showed that our
Reliability and accuracy of the generated point predictions method was able to maintain a nominal probability coverage
and produce significantly narrower PIs without detriment to its are affected by factors such as the sparsity of training data
targetestimationaccuracywhencomparedtothosePIsgenerated or target variables affected by probabilistic events [9]. One
bythreestate-of-the-artneural-network-basedmethods.Inother waytoimprovethereliabilityandcredibilityofsuchcomplex
words, our method was shown to produce higher-quality PIs.
models is to quantify the uncertainty in the predictions they
Index Terms—Prediction intervals, companion networks, un- generate [10]. This uncertainty (σ2) can be quantified using
y
certainty quantification, deep regression. prediction intervals (PIs), which provide an estimate of the
upper and the lower bounds within which a prediction will
fallaccordingtoacertainprobability[11].Hence,theamount
I. INTRODUCTION
of uncertainty for each prediction is provided by the width
Deep learning has gained a great deal of attention due to of its corresponding PI. PIs account for two types of un-
its ability to outperform alternative machine learning methods certainty: model uncertainty (σ2 ) and data noise variance
model
in solving complex problems in a variety of domains. In (σ2 )[11],where σ2 =σ2 +σ2 .Modeluncertainty
noise y model noise
conjunction with the availability of large-scale datasets and arises due to model selection, training data variance, and
modern parallel hardware architectures (e.g., GPUs), convolu- parameter uncertainty [12]. Data noise variance measures the
tional neural networks (CNNs), as one popular deep learning variance of the error between observable target values and the
technique, have attained unprecedented achievements in fields outputs produced by the learned models.
Recently, some NN-based methods have been proposed to
Manuscript received November 1, 2022; revised March 13, 2023; revised solvethePIgenerationproblem[11]–[16].Thesemethodsaim
August 3, 2023; accepted December 1, 2023. This research was supported
to train NNs using loss functions that aim to balance at least
by a USDA-NIFA-AFRI Food Security Program Coordinated Agricultural
Project (Accession Number 2016-68004-24769), and also by the USDA- two of the following three objectives: minimizing mean PI
NRCS Conservation Innovation Grant from the On-farm Trials Program width, maximizing PI coverage probability, and minimizing
(AwardNumberNR213A7500013G021).
the mean error of the target predictions. Although the afore-
Giorgio Morales and John W. Sheppard are with the Gianforte School
of Computing, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, US (email: mentioned works have achieved promising results, there exist
giorgiol.moralesluna@student.montana.edu;john.sheppard@montana.edu). some limitations that need to be addressed. For instance, they
This paper is a preprint (submitted to IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
rely on the use of deep ensembles; however, training several
worksandLearningSystems).©©2022IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterial
is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in models may become impractical when applied to complex
anycurrentorfuturemedia,includingreprinting/republishingthismaterialfor modelsandlargedatasets[17].Furthermore,theirperformance
advertisingorpromotionalpurposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresale
is sensitive to the selection of multiple tunable hyperparam-
orredistributiontoserversorlists,orreuseofanycopyrightedcomponentof
thisworkinotherworks eters whose values may differ substantially depending on the
4202
raM
22
]GL.sc[
4v07360.2122:viXra
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 2
a PI-generation NN. It is designed to solve a multi-
objective optimization problem: minimizing the mean PI
width while ensuring PI integrity using constraints that
maximize the probability coverage implicitly.
2) We present a new PI-generation framework that consists
of two companion NNs: one that is trained to produce
accurate target estimations, and another that generates
high-quality PIs; thus, avoiding the common trade-off
between target estimation accuracy, and quality of PIs.
3) We introduce a self-adaptive coefficient that balances the
twoobjectivesofourDualAQDlossfunction.Thisdiffers
from previous approaches that consider this balancing
coefficientasatunablehyperparameterwithafixedvalue
throughout the training process.
4) We present a method called batch-sorting that sorts the
mini-batches according to their corresponding PI width
and, as such, avoids generating unnecessarily wide PIs.
5) Our method is shown to generate higher quality PIs and
betterreflectsvaryinglevelsofuncertaintywithinthedata
Fig.1. AnexampleofourPI-generationmethodonasyntheticdataset. than the compared methods.
application. Therefore, fine-tuning an ensemble of deep NNs II. RELATEDWORK
becomes a computationally expensive task. Finally, methods
One of the more common approaches to uncertainty quan-
that generate PI bounds and target estimations simultaneously
tificationforregressiontasksisviaBayesianapproaches,such
have to deal with a trade-off between the quality of generated
as those represented by Bayesian neural networks (BNNs),
PIs and the accuracy of the target estimations.
which model the NN parameters as distributions. As such,
Pearce et al. [12] coined the term High-quality (HQ)
they have the advantage that they allow for a natural quantifi-
principle,whichreferstotherequirementthatPIsbeasnarrow
cation of uncertainty. In particular, uncertainty is quantified
as possible while capturing some specified proportion of the
by learning a posterior weight distribution [18], [19]. The
predicteddatapoints.Followingthisprinciple,weposethePI
inference process involves marginalization over the weights,
generation problem for regression as a multi-objective opti-
whichingeneralisintractable,andsamplingprocessessuchas
mizationproblem.Inparticular,ourproposalinvolvestraining
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) can be computationally
two neural networks (NNs): one that generates accurate target
prohibitive.Thus,approximatesolutionshavebeenformulated
estimations and one that generates narrow PIs (see Fig. 1).
using variational inference (VI) [20]. However, Wu et al. [21]
The first NN is trained to minimize the mean squared error
arguedthatVIapproachesarefragilesincetheyrequirecareful
of the target estimations. Our main contribution is the design
initialization and tuning. To overcome these issues, they pro-
ofalossfunctionforthesecondNNthat,besidesthegenerated
posed approximating moments in NNs to eliminate gradient
PI bounds and the target, considers the output of the first
variance. They also presented an empirical Bayes procedure
NN as an additional input. It minimizes the mean prediction
forselectingpriorvariancesautomatically.Moreover,Izmailov
interval width and uses constraints to ensure the integrity of
et al. [22] discussed scaling BNNs to deep neural networks
the generated PIs while implicitly maximizing the probability
by constructing low-dimensional subspaces of the parameter
coverage (Sec. III-A). Our second contribution is a method
space. By doing so, they were able to apply elliptical slice
that updates the coefficient that balances the two optimization
sampling and VI, which struggle in the full parameter space.
objectives of our loss function automatically throughout train-
In addition, Lut et al. [23] presented a Bayesian-learning-
ing (Sec. III-C). Our method avoids generating unnecessarily
based sparse stochastic configuration network that replaces
widePIsbyusingatechniquethatsortsthemini-batchesatthe
the Gaussian distribution with a Laplace one as the prior
beginningofeachtrainingepochaccordingtothewidthofthe
distribution for output weights.
generatedPIs(Sec.III-B).ThenweapplyaMonteCarlo-based
Despite the aforementioned improvements in Bayesian ap-
approachtoaccountfortheuncertaintyofthegeneratedupper
proaches, they still suffer from various limitations. Namely,
andlowerbounds(Sec.III-E).Finally,whencomparedtothree
the high dimensionality of the parameter space of deep NNs,
state-of-the-art NN-based methods, we show that our method
including complex models such as CNNs, makes the cost of
is able to produce PIs that maintain the target probability
characterizinguncertaintyovertheparametersprohibitive[24].
coverage while yielding better mean width without detriment
Attempts to scale BNNs to deep NNs are considerably more
to its target estimation accuracy (Sec. IV).
expensive computationally than VI-based methods and have
Our specific contributions are summarized as follows:
been scaled up to low-complexity problems only, such as
1) Our main contribution is a novel loss function called MNIST [25]. Conversely, non-Bayesian methods do not re-
Dual Accuracy-Quality-Driven (DualAQD) used to train quire the use of initial prior distributions and biases to train
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 3
the models [11]. Recent works have demonstrated that non- thermore, let yb = {y ,...,y } be a set of corresponding
1 N
Bayesianapproachesprovidebetterorcompetitiveuncertainty target observations where y ∈ R. We construct a NN re-
i
estimates than their Bayesian counterparts [11], [12], [26]. In gression model that captures the association between Xb and
addition,theyarescalabletocomplexproblemsandcanhandle yb. More specifically, f(·) denotes the function computed by
millions of parameters. the NN, and θ denotes its weights. Hence, given an input
f
MC-Dropout was proposed by Gal and Ghahramani [8] x , f(x ,θ ) computes the target estimate yˆ. This network is
i i f i
to quantify model uncertainty in NNs. They cast dropout trainedtogenerateaccurateestimatesyˆ withrespecttoy .We
i i
training in deep NNs as approximate Bayesian inference in quantify this accuracy by calculating the mean squared error
deepGaussianprocesses.Themethodusesdropoutrepeatedly of the estimation MSE = 1 (cid:80)N (yˆ −y )2. Thus, f is
est N i=1 i i
to select subsamples of active nodes in the network, turning a conventionally optimized as follows:
single network into an ensemble. Hence, model uncertainty is
θ = argmin MSE .
estimated by the sample variance of the ensemble predictions. f est
θf
MC-Dropout is not able to estimate PIs themselves, as it
does not account for data noise variance. Therefore, Zhu and Once network f(·) is trained, we use a separate NN whose
Laptev[27]proposedestimatingPIsbyquantifyingthemodel goal is to generate prediction intervals for yb given data Xb.
uncertainty through MC-Dropout, coupled with estimating Let g(·) denote the function computed by this PI-generation
the data noise variance as the mean squared error (MSE) NN, and θ g denotes its weights. Given an input x i , g(x i ,θ g )
calculated over an independent held-out validation set. generates its corresponding upper and lower bounds, yˆ i u and
Recently, several non-Bayesian approaches have been pro- yˆ i ℓ, such that [yˆ i ℓ, yˆ i u] = g(x i ,θ g ). Note that there is no
posed for approximate uncertainty quantification. Such ap- assumption of yˆ i ℓ and yˆ i u being symmetric with respect to the
proaches use models whose outputs provide estimations of target estimate yˆ i produced by network f(·). We describe its
the predictive uncertainty directly. For instance, Schupbach et optimization procedure below.
al. [28] proposed a method that estimates confidence intervals We say that a training sample x i ∈ Xb is covered (i.e.,
in NN ensembles based on the use of U-statistics. Other we set k i = 1) if both the predicted value yˆ i and the target
techniques estimate PIs by using ensembles of feedforward observation y i fall within the estimated PI:
networks [29] or stochastic configuration networks [30] and (cid:40)
1, if yˆℓ <yˆ < yˆu and yˆℓ <y < yˆu
bootstrapping. Lakshminarayanan et al. [26] presented an k = i i i i i i (1)
i
0, otherwise.
ensemble approach based on the Mean-Variance Estimation
(MVE) method introduced by Nix and Weigend [31]. Here, Then, using k , we define the prediction interval coverage
i
each NN has two outputs: one that represents the mean (or probability (PICP) for Xb as the percent of covered samples
target estimation) and the other that represents the variance of with respect to the batch size N: PICP = (cid:80)N k /N.
i=1 i
a normal distribution, which is used to quantify the data noise The HQ principle suggests that the width of the prediction
variance.OtherapproachesusemodelsthatgeneratePIbounds intervalsshouldbeminimizedaslongastheycapturethetarget
explicitly.Khrosavietal.[11]proposedaLowerUpperBound observationvalue.Thus,Pearceetal.[12]consideredthemean
Estimation(LUBE)methodthatusesaNNandalossfunction prediction interval width of captured points (MPIW ) as
capt
to minimize the PI width while maximizing the probability part of their loss function:
coverage using simulated annealing.
N
Similar approaches have attempted to optimize the LUBE 1 (cid:88)
MPIW = (yˆu−yˆℓ)k , (2)
loss function using methods such as genetic algorithms [13] capt ϵ+ (cid:80) k i i i
i i i=1
and particle swarm optimization [14]. Pearce et al. [12] pro-
where ϵ is a small number used to avoid dividing by zero.
posedamethodcalledQD-Ensthatconsistsofaquality-driven
However, we argue that minimizing MPIW does not
loss function similar to LUBE but that is compatible with capt
implythatthewidthofthePIsgeneratedforthenon-captured
gradientdescent.ThenSalemetal.[16]proposedQD+which
samples will not decrease along with the width of the PIs
isbasedonQD-Ens,whichusesexactlythesametwopenalty
generated for the captured samples1.
functionstoreducethePIwidthandmaximizetheprobability
Furthermore, consider the case where none of the samples
coverage. They used three-output NNs and included a third
are captured by the PIs, as likely happens at the beginning of
penalty term that aims to decrease the mean squared error
thetraining.Then,thepenaltyisminimum(i.e.,MPIW =
of the target predictions and a fourth penalty term to enforce capt
0). Hence, the calculated gradients of the loss function will
the point predictions to lay inside the generated PIs. In our
force the weights of the NN to remain in the state where
work, we use only three penalty terms; the differences are
∀i, k =0, which contradicts the goal of maximizing PICP.
explained in Sec. III-F. Finally, both QD-Ens and QD+ used i
Instead of minimizing MPIW directly, we let
anensembleapproachtoestimatethemodeluncertaintywhile capt
we use a Monte Carlo approach on a single network. N
1 (cid:88)
PI = (|yˆu−y |+|y −yˆℓ|), (3)
III. PROPOSEDMETHODOLOGY pen N i i i i
i=1
A. Dual Accuracy-Quality-Driven Loss Function
LetXb ={x ,...,x }beatrainingbatchwithN samples 1We provide a toy example demonstrating this behavior in the fol-
1 N lowinglinkhttps://github.com/NISL-MSU/PredictionIntervals/tree/master/src/
where each sample x i ∈ Rz consists of z covariates. Fur- PredictionIntervals/models/QD toy example.ipynb
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 4
whichweminimizeinstead.Thisfunctionquantifiesthewidth
of the PI as the sum of the distance between the upper bound
and the target and the distance between the lower bound
and the target. We argue that PI is more suitable than
pen
MPIW given that it forces yˆu, y , and yˆℓ to be closer
capt i i i
together. For example, suppose that the following case is
observed during the first training epoch: y = 24, yˆ = 25,
i i
yˆu = 0.2, and yˆℓ = 0.1. Then MPIW = 0 given that
i i capt
the target is not covered by the PI, while PI pen = 47.7. As Fig. 2. L3 penalty calculation, (a) without batch sorting; (b) with batch
a result, PI will penalize this state while MPIW will sorting.
pen capt
not. Thus, we define our first optimization objective as:
B. Batch Sorting
min L =min PI .
1 pen
θg θg The objective function L
2
minimizes the term P (Eq. 4),
However, minimizing L 1 is not enough to ensure the in- forcing the distance between the target estimate of a sample
tegrityofthePIs.Theirintegrityisgivenbytheconditionsthat and its PI bounds to be larger than the maximum absolute
the upper bound must be greater than the target and the target error within its corresponding batch. This term assumes there
estimate (yˆ i u > y i and yˆ i u > yˆ i ) and that the target and the existsasimilarityamongthesampleswithinabatch.However,
target estimate, in turn, must be greater than the lower bound consider the case depicted in Fig. 2 where we show four
(y i > yˆ i ℓ and yˆ i > yˆ i ℓ). Note that if the differences (yˆ i u−y i ) samples that have been split randomly into two batches. In
and (y i −yˆ i ℓ) are greater than the maximum estimation error Fig. 2a, the PIs of the second and third samples already
within the training batch Xb (i.e., (yˆ i u−y i )>max i |yˆ i −y i | cover their observed targets. Nevertheless, according to L 2 ,
and (yˆ i u−y i )>max i |yˆ i −y i |, ∀i∈[1,...,N]), it is implied these samples will yield high penalties because the distances
that all samples are covered (k i =1, ∀i∈[1,...,N]). between their target estimates and their PI bounds are less
Motivatedbythis,weincludeanadditionalpenaltyfunction thanξ(1)andξ(2),respectively,forcingtheirwidthstoincrease
to ensure PI integrity and maximize the number of covered unnecessarily.
samples within the batch simultaneously. Let us denote the Forthisreason,weproposeamethodcalled“batchsorting”,
mean differences between the PI bounds and the target esti- which consists of sorting the training samples with respect to
matesasd u = (cid:80)N i=1 (yˆ i u−y i )/N andd ℓ = (cid:80)N i=1 (y i −yˆ i ℓ)/N. their corresponding generated PI widths after each epoch. By
Let ξ =max i |yˆ i −y i | denote the maximum distance between doingso,thebatcheswillprocesssampleswithsimilarwidths,
a target estimate and its corresponding target value within the avoiding unnecessary widening. For example, in Fig. 2b,
batch (ξ >0). From this, our penalty function is defined as: the penalty terms are low given that d(1),d(1) > ξ(1) and
u ℓ
P =eξ−du +eξ−dℓ, (4) d( u 2),d( ℓ 2) > ξ(2). Note that, during testing, the PI generated
for a given sample is independent of other samples and, as
Here,ifthePIintegrityisnotmet(i.e.,d <0ord <0)then
u ℓ such, batch sorting becomes unnecessary during inference.
their exponent magnitude becomes larger than ξ, producing a
large penalty value. Moreover, these terms encourage both d
u
C. Self-adaptive Coefficient λ
and d not only to be positive but also to be greater than ξ.
ℓ
Thisimpliesthatthedistancebetweenthetargety andanyof The coefficient λ of Eq. 5 balances the two optimization
i
its bounds will be larger than the maximum error within the objectives L 1 and L 2 . In this section, we propose that,
batch, ξ, thus the target y will lie within the PI. From this, instead of λ being a tunable hyperparameter with a fixed
i
we define our second optimization objective as: value throughout training, it should be adapted throughout the
learning process automatically.
min L =min P.
2 Typically,thePICP valueimprovesaslongastheMPIW
θg θg
value increases; however, extremely wide PIs are not useful.
Then our proposed dual accuracy-quality-driven loss function
We usually aim to obtain PIs with a nominal probability
is given by
coverage no greater than (1−α). A common value for the
Loss =L +λL , (5)
DualAQD 1 2
significance level α is 0.05, in which case we say that we are
where λ is a self-adaptive coefficient that controls the relative 95% confident that the target value will fall within the PI.
importance of L 1 and L 2 . Hence, our multi-objective opti- Let PICP(t) denote the PICP value calculated on the
train
mization problem can be expressed as: trainingsetX afterthet-thtrainingepoch.IfPICP(t)
train train
θ =argmin Loss . is below the confidence target (1−α), more relative impor-
g DualAQD
θg tance should be given to the objective L
2
that enforces PI
For simplicity, we assume that f(·) and g(·) have L layers integrity (i.e., λ should increase). Likewise, if PICP(t) is
train
and the same network architecture except for the output layer. higherthan(1−α),morerelativeimportanceshouldbegiven
Network f(·) is trained first. Then, weights θ are initialized to the objective L that minimizes MPIW (i.e., λ should
g 1
using weights θ except for those of the last layer: θ(0)[1 : decrease).
f g
L−1]=θ [1:L−1]. Note, that, in general, DualAQD can We formalize this intuition by defining the cost C that
f
use different network architectures for f(·) and g(·). quantifies the distance from PICP(t) to the confidence
train
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 5
Algorithm 1 DualAQD method a solution z is said to dominate another solution z only if it
i j
1: functionTRAINNNWITHDUALAQD(Xtrain,Ytrain,f,g,α,η) produces narrower PIs.
2: λ←1
We use a grid search to tune the hyperparameter η for
3: for eacht∈range(1,maxEpochs) do
4: ift>1then training (Eq. 6). For each value, we train a NN using 10-fold
5: Batches←batchSorting(Xtrain,Ytrain,widths)
cross-validationandcalculatetheaverageperformancemetrics
6: else
7: Batches←shuffle(Xtrain,Ytrain) on the validation sets. Then, the hyperparameters are selected
8: for eachbatch∈Batches do using the dominance criteria explained above.
9: x,y←batch
10: yˆ←f(x)
11: yˆu,yˆℓ←g(x)
12: loss←DualAQD(λ,y,yˆ,yˆu,yˆℓ) E. PI Aggregation Using MC-Dropout
13: update(g,loss)
In Sec. I, we explained that both the model uncertainty
1
1
4
5
:
:
P
//
I
U
C
pd
P
at t
(
e r
t
a
)
c i o n ef
,
fi
w
ci
i
e
d
n
t
t
h
λ
s(t)←metrics(Xtrain,Ytrain)
(σ2 )andthedatanoisevariance(σ2 )havetobetaken
model noise
16: C←((1−α)−PICP t ( r t a ) in ) into account when generating PIs. A model trained using
17: λ=λ+η·C
18: returng Loss DualAQD generates PI estimates based on the training
data; that is, it accounts for σ2 . However, we still need to
noise
quantify the uncertainty of those estimates due to σ2 .
model
target (1−α): C =(1−α)−PICP(t) . Then, we propose Unlike previous work that used explicit NN ensembles to
train
to increase or decrease λ proportionally to the cost function quantify σ2 [12], [26], we propose to use a Monte Carlo-
model
C after each training epoch as follows (see Algorithm 1): basedapproach.Specifically,weuseMC-Dropout[32],which
consists of using dropout layers that ignore each neuron of
λ(t) =λ(t−1)+η·C, (6) the network according to some probability or dropout rate.
Then, during each forward pass with active dropout layers, a
whereλ(t) isthevalueofthecoefficientλatthet-thiteration
slightlydifferentnetworkarchitectureisusedand,asaresult,a
(we consider that λ(0) =1), and η is a tunable scale factor.
slightly different prediction is obtained. According to Gal and
Note that Algorithm 1 takes as inputs the data X
train Ghahramani [8], this process can be interpreted as a Bayesian
and corresponding targets Y as well as the trained
train approximation of the Gaussian process.
prediction network f, the untrained network g, the sig-
Our approach consists of using M forward passes through
nificance level α, and the scale factor η. Function
the network with active dropout layers. Given an input x ,
batchSorting(X ,Y ,widths(t−1)) returns a list i
train train the estimates yˆ(m), yˆu(m), and yˆℓ(m) are obtained at the m-th
of batches sorted according to the PI widths generated dur- i i i
iteration. Hence, the expected target estimate y¯, the expected
ing the previous training epoch (see Sec.III-B). Function i
upper bound y¯u, and the expected lower bound y¯ℓ are cal-
DualAQD(λ,y,yˆ,yˆu,yˆℓ) represents the DualAQD loss func- i i
culated as: y¯ = 1 (cid:80)M yˆ(m),y¯u = 1 (cid:80)M yˆu(m),y¯ℓ =
tion (Eq.5) while update(g,loss) encompasses the conven- i M m=1 i i M m=1 i i
1 (cid:80)M yˆℓ(m).
tional backpropagation and gradient descent processes used M m=1 i
to update the weights of network g. Furthermore, function
metrics(X ,Y )passesX throughgtogenerate F. Comparison to QD-Ens and QD+
train train train
the corresponding PIs and their widths, and to calculate
Here we consider the differences between our method
compares the output to Y to calculate the PICP(t)
train train (DualAQD)andthetwomethodsQD-Ens[12]andQD+[16].
value using Y .
train For reference, we include the loss functions used by QD-Ens
and QD+:
D. Parameter and Hyperparameter Selection
Loss =MPIW +
We train a neural network on the training set X during QD capt
train
N
T epochs using Loss DualAQD as the loss function. After the δ max(0,(1−α)−PICP)2.
t-thtrainingepoch,wecalculatetheperformancemetricsz = α(1−α)
t
{PICP(t),MPIW(t)} on the validation set X . Thus, we Loss =(1−λ )(1−λ )MPIW +
val val val QD+ 1 2 capt
consider that the set of optimal weights of the network, θ g , λ (1−λ )max(0,(1−α)−PICP)2+
1 2
willbethosethatmaximizeperformanceonthevalidationset.
λ MSE +
Theremainingquestioniswhatarethecriteriatocomparetwo 2 est
N
solutions z i and z j . ξ (cid:88)(cid:2) max(0,(yˆu−yˆ)+max(0,(yˆ −yˆℓ) (cid:3) ,
Taking this criterion into account, we consider that a solu- N i i i i
i=1
tion z dominates another solution z (z ⪯z ) if:
i j i j
where δ, λ , λ , and ξ are hyperparameters used by QD-Ens
• PICP v ( a i) l >PICP v ( a j) l and PICP v ( a i) l ≤(1−α). and QD+ t 1 o ba 2 lance the learning objectives. The differences
• PICP v ( a i) l == PICP v ( a j) l < (1−α) and MPIW v ( a i) l < comparedtoourmethodarelistedinorderofimportancefrom
MPIW(j)
highest to lowest as follows:
val
• PICP v ( a i) l ≥(1−α) and MPIW v ( a i) l <MPIW v ( a j) l • QD-Ens and QD+ use objective functions that maximize
In other words, if α = 0.05, we seek a solution whose PICP directly aiming to a goal of (1−α) at the batch
PICP value is at least 95%. After exceeding this value, level. We maximize PICP indirectly through L , which
val 2
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 6
encourages the model to produce PIs that cover as many TABLEI
training points as possible. This is achieved by producing PIMETRICSMSE val,MPIW val,PICP val,ANDPI δvalEVALUATED
ONTHESYNTHETICDATASETUSING5×2CROSS-VALIDATION.
PIs whose widths are larger than the maximum absolute
error within each training batch. Then the optimal weights Method MSEval MPIWval PICPval(%) PIδval
ofthenetworkareselectedasthosethatproduceacoverage DualAQD 5.27±0.27 7.30±0.29 95.5±0.48 1.52±0.13
DualAQD noBS 5.27±0.27 9.16±0.35 96.3±0.77 3.08±0.19
probability on the validation set of at least (1−α). QD+ 5.28±0.29 8.56±0.14 95.5±0.31 3.12±0.24
• Note that PICP is not directly differentiable as it involves QD-Ens 5.31±0.26 10.17±0.79 94.0±1.57 4.88±0.17
MC-Dropout-PI 5.22±0.30 9.31±0.27 93.3±0.63 5.04±0.08
countingthenumberofsamplesthatlaywithinthepredicted
PIs. However, QD-Ens and QD+ force its differentiation by
including a sigmoid operation and a softening factor (i.e.,
nodes with ReLU activation. A 5 × 2-fold cross-validation
an additional hyperparameter). On the other hand, the loss
design was used to train and evaluate all networks.
functions of DualAQD are already differentiable.
Knowing the probability distribution of the noise at each
• OurobjectiveL 1 minimizesPI pen ,whichisamoresuitable positionxallowsustocalculatetheideal95%PIs(α=0.05),
penalty function than MPIW (cf. Sec III-A).
capt [yu,yℓ], as follows:
• OurobjectiveL 2 maximizesPICP andensuresPIintegrity
simultaneously. QD+ uses a truncated linear constraint and
yu(x)=y(x)+1.96ϵ, and yℓ(x)=y(x)−1.96ϵ,
a separate function to maximize PICP.
• NN-based PI generation methods aim to balance three
where 1.96 is the approximate value of the 95% confidence
objectives: (1) accurate target prediction, (2) generation of
interval of the normal distribution. Therefore, we define a
narrow PIs, and (3) high coverage probability.QD-Ens uses
new metric we called PI that sums the absolute differences
a single coefficient δ within its loss function that balances δ
between the estimated bounds and the ideal 95% bounds for
objectives (2) and (3) and does not optimize objective (1)
all the samples within a set X:
explicitly, while QD+ uses three coefficients λ , λ , and ξ
1 2
to balance the three objectives. All of the coefficients are
tunable hyperparameters. Our loss function, Loss DualAQD , PI δ = |X 1 | (cid:88)(cid:0) |yu(x)−yˆu(x)|+|yℓ(x)−yˆℓ(x)| (cid:1) .
uses a balancing coefficient whose value is not fixed but x∈X
is adapted throughout the training process using a single
hyperparameter (i.e., the scale factor η). We compared the performance of DualAQD using batch
• Our approach uses two companion NNs f(·) and g(·) that sorting and without using batch sorting (denoted as “Du-
optimize objective (1) and objectives (2) and (3), respec- alAQD noBS” in Table I). All networks were trained using a
tively, to avoid the trade-off between them. Conversely, the fixedmini-batchsizeof16andtheAdadeltaoptimizer.TableI
other approaches optimize a single NN architecture. givestheaverageperformanceforthemetricscalculatedonthe
• We use MC-Dropout to estimate the model uncertainty. By validation sets, MSE val , MPIW val , PICP val , and PI δval ,
doing so, we need to train only a single model instead of and corresponding standard deviations.
using an explicit ensemble of models, as in QD-Ens and We also compared our DualAQD PI generation method-
QD+. Also, QD+ requires fitting a split normal density ology to three other NN-based methods: QD+ [16], QD-
function [33] for each data point to aggregate the PIs Ens [12], and a PI generation method based on MC-Dropout
produced by the ensemble, thus increasing the complexity alone [27] (denoted MC-Dropout-PI). For the sake of con-
of the learning process. sistency and fairness, we used the same configuration (i.e.,
network architecture, optimizer, and batch size) for all the
IV. EXPERIMENTS
networks trained in our experiments. In our preliminary ex-
A. Experiments with Synthetic Data periments, for the case of QD+, QD-Ens, and MC-Dropout-
Previous approaches have been tested on datasets with sim- PI, we found that batch sorting either helped to improve
ilar uncertainty levels across all their samples, or on synthetic their performance or there was no significant change. Thus,
datasetswithasingleregionoflowuncertaintysurroundedby for the sake of fairness and consistency, we decided to use
a gradual increase of noise. This is a limitation as it does not batchsortingforallcomparedmethods.Inaddition,wetested
allow testing the ability of the PI’s to adapt to rapid changes Dropout rates between 0.1 and 0.5. The obtained results did
of uncertainty within the data. Therefore, we test all of the notindicateastatisticallysignificantdifference;thus,weused
methods on a more challenging synthetic dataset with more a Dropout rate of 0.1 for all networks and datasets.
fluctuations and extreme levels of uncertainty. The code is Note that the only difference between the network ar-
availableathttps://github.com/NISL-MSU/PredictionIntervals. chitecture used by the four methods is that QD+ requires
We created a synthetic dataset with varying PI widths that three outputs, QD-Ens requires two (i.e., the lower and upper
consists of a sinusoid with Gaussian noise. Specifically, the bounds),andMC-Dropout-PIrequiresone.ForDualAQDand
dataset contains 1000 points generated using the equation MC-Dropout-PI,weusedF =100forwardpasseswithactive
y(x)=5cos(x)+10+ϵ,wherex∈[−5,5]andϵisGaussian dropoutlayers.ForQD+andQD-Ens,weusedanensembleof
noisewhosemagnitudedependsonx:ϵ=(2cos(1.2x)+2)v five networks and a grid search to choose the hyperparameter
where v ∼N(0,1). For these experiments, we trained a feed- values. Fig. 3 shows the PIs generated by the four methods
forwardneuralnetworkwithtwohiddenlayers,eachwith100 from the first validation set together with the ideal 95% PIs.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 7
TABLEII
PIMETRICSMSE val,MPIW val,ANDPICP valEVALUATEDONTHE
BENCHMARKDATASETSUSING10-FOLDCROSS-VALIDATION.
MC-
Dataset Metric DualAQD QD+ QD-Ens
Dropout-PI
MPIWval 9.99±2.26 12.14±2.05 16.13±0.67 12.52±2.28
Boston MSEval 8.91±3.90 11.91±5.24 15.29±5.07 8.94±3.87
PICPval(%) 95.0±1.6 95.6±1.9 97.2±1.3 96.0±0.9
MPIWval 15.72±1.42 18.57±2.06 25.42±1.30 20.52±1.74
Concrete MSEval 22.45±4.79 26.65±8.02 29.30±5.25 22.71±4.96
PICPval(%) 95.2±0.5 95.2±1.3 97.9±1.6 95.7±1.2
MPIWval 1.41±0.12 2.94±0.05 10.99±1.47 3.81±0.21
Energy MSEval 0.25±0.05 0.31±0.08 0.35±0.25 0.26±0.05
PICPval(%) 96.5±0.6 99.0±1.0 100.0±0.0 99.5±0.6
MPIWval 0.280±0.01 0.311±0.01 0.502±0.01 0.336±0.01
Kin8nm MSEval 0.005±0.00 0.007±0.00 0.009±0.00 0.005±0.00
PICPval(%) 95.1±0.1 96.6±0.4 98.5±0.3 97.5±0.4
MPIWval 14.60±0.35 15.31±0.44 27.57±1.54 16.08±0.63
Power MSEval 15.23±1.34 16.43±1.34 17.14±1.11 15.26±1.31
PICPval(%) 95.2±0.1 95.7±0.3 99.6±0.2 96.4±0.5
MPIWval 13.02±0.26 13.05±0.14 15.79±0.24 15.95±0.20
Protein MSEval 14.79±0.40 17.51±0.59 18.35±0.87 15.05±0.42
PICPval(%) 95.0±0.1 95.4±0.4 95.1±0.5 94.8±0.1
MPIWval 1.56±0.42 4.10±0.17 10.99±1.47 4.74±1.20
Yacht MSEval 0.51±0.53 0.72±0.70 0.35±0.25 0.53±0.54
PICPval(%) 97.1±0.9 98.4±2.2 100.0±0.0 100.0±0.0
MPIWval 29.68±0.29 32.68±0.25 37.03±0.13 34.25±0.16
Year MSEval 73.26±0.76 104.8±8.1 78.12±0.87 73.13±0.69
PICPval(%) 95.1±0.1 95.4±0.9 37.03±0.1 93.82±0.0
Fig.3. PerformanceofPIgenerationmethodsonthesyntheticdataset. 25th and 75th percentiles, whiskers extend to the maximum
andminimumpoints(notcountingoutliers),andoutlierpoints
B. Benchmarking Experiments arethosepasttheendofthewhiskers(i.e.,thosepointsgreater
than 1.5×IQR plus the third quartile or less than 1.5×IQR
We experimented with eight open-access datasets from the
minusthefirstquartile,whereIQRistheinter-quartilerange).
UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository [34]. Note that even
Note that even though QD-Ens uses only one hyperparam-
though our experiments use scalar and 2-D regression tasks
eter (see Sec. III-F), it is more sensitive to small changes.
(Sec. IV-C), our proposed method can be extended to other
For example, a hyperparameter value of δ = 0.021 yielded
tasks such as classification. For each dataset, we used a feed-
poor PIs with PICP <40% while a value of δ =0.02105
forward neural network whose architecture was the same as val
yielded too wide PIs with PICP <100%. For this reason,
that described in Sec. IV-A. We used 10-fold cross-validation val
the hyperparameter δ of the QD-Ens approach was chosen
to train and evaluate all networks. Table II gives the aver-
manually while the scale factor η of DualAQD was chosen
age performance for the metrics calculated on the validation
usingagridsearchwithvalues{0.001,0.005,0.01,0.05,0.1}.
sets, MSE , MPIW , and PICP , and corresponding
val val val
Fig. 5 shows the difference between the learning curves
standard deviations. We applied z-score normalization (mean
obtained during one iteration of the cross-validation for the
equal to 0 and standard deviation equal to 1) to each feature
Power dataset using two different η values (i.e., η = 0.01
inthetrainingsetwhiletheexactsamescalingwasappliedto
and η =0.1). The dashed lines indicate the training epoch at
the features in the validation and test sets. Likewise, min-max
which the optimal weights θ were selected according to the
normalization was applied to the response variable; however, g
dominancecriteriaexplainedinSec.III-D.Ontheotherhand,
TableIIshowstheresultsafterre-scalingtotheoriginalscale.
the hyperparameters λ and λ of QD+ were chosen using a
Similar to Sec. IV-A, all networks were trained using a fixed 1 2
random search since it requires significantly higher training
mini-batchsizeof16,exceptfortheProteinandYeardatasets
and execution time.
that used a mini-batch size of 512 due to their large size.
The bold entries in Table II indicate the method that
achieved the lowest average MPIW value and that its C. Prediction Intervals for Crop Yield Prediction
val
difference with respect to the values obtained by the other We assert our approach is general in applicability. To test
methods is statistically significant according to a paired t-test this assertion, we decided to experiment with a difficult, real-
performed at the 0.05 significance level. The results obtained world application of 2D regression using spatially correlated
by DualAQD were significantly narrower than the compared data to convey the usefulness of our method. Specifically, we
methods while having similar MSE and PICP of at focused on the crop yield prediction problem, which has an
val val
least 95%. Furthermore, Fig. 4 depicts the distribution of important impact on society and is one of the main tasks of
the scores achieved by all the compared methods on all precision agriculture. Accurate and reliable crop yield predic-
the datasets, where the line through the center of each box tion, along with careful uncertainty management strategies,
indicates the median F1 score, the edges of the boxes are the enablesfarmerstomakeinformedmanagementdecisions,such
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 8
Fig. 4. Box plots of the MPIW val and MSE val scores of DualAQD, QD+, QD-Ens, and MC-Dropout-PI PI generation methods on the synthetic and
benchmarkingdatasets:(a)Synthetic.(b)Boston.(c)Concrete.(d)Energy.(e)Kin8nm.(f)Power.(g)Protein.(h)Yacht.(i)Year.
backscattering coefficients obtained from synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) images from Sentinel-I. The response variable
corresponds to the yield value in bushels per acre (bu/ac),
measured during the harvest season (August). In other words,
thedataacquiredinMarchisusedtopredictcropyieldvalues
in August of the same year.
Theyieldpredictionproblemrequirestwo-dimensional(2D)
inputs and 2D outputs. As such, it can be viewed as a 2D
regression task. To tackle this problem, we trained a CNN
using the Hyper3DNetReg 3D-2D network, architecture we
presented in [36], which was specifically designed to predict
the yield values of small spatial neighborhoods of a field
simultaneously. We then modified this architecture to produce
three output patches of 5×5 pixels (i.e., the estimated yield
patch and two patches containing the upper and lower bounds
of each pixel, respectively) instead of one.
For our experiments, we used data collected from three
winter wheat fields, which we refer to as “A,” “B,” and “C”,
Fig.5. MPIW andPICP learningcurvesobtainedforthePowerdataset respectively. Three crop years of data were collected for each
usingDualAQD.(a)η=0.01.(b)η=0.1. field. The information from the first two years was used to
createthetrainingandvalidationsets(90%ofthedataisused
fortrainingand10%forvalidation).Thefourmethods,AQD,
as determining the nitrogen fertilizer rates needed in specific QD+,QD-Ens,andMC-Dropout-PI,werecomparedusingthe
regions of their fields to maximize profit while minimizing results from the test set of each field, which consists of data
environmental impact [35]. fromthelastobservedyearandwhoseground-truthyieldmap
We use an early-yield prediction dataset of winter wheat is denoted as Y. The test set was used to generate a predicted
we curated and presented in a previous work [36]. The early- yield map of the entire field, Yˆ, and its corresponding lower
yield prediction is posed as a regression problem where and upper bounds, Yˆ and Yˆ , respectively.
L U
the explanatory variables are represented by a set of eight Fig. 6 shows the ground-truth yield map for field “A”
features obtained during the growing season (March). These (darker colors represent lower yield values) along with the
features consist of nitrogen rate applied, precipitation, slope, uncertainty maps obtained by the four compared methods and
elevation, topographic position index (TPI), aspect, and two their corresponding PICP and MPIW values. Field “A” is
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 9
TABLEIII
PIMETRICSRMSEtest,MPIWtest,PICPtest,ANDµEVALUATEDON
THEYIELDPREDICTIONDATASETS.
Field Method RMSEtest MPIWtest PIC
(%
P
)
test µ
DualAQD 15.44 53.75 92.8 .350
QD+ 17.73 54.27 89.5 .397
A
QD-Ens 15.55 53.99 92.3 .359
MC-Dropout-PI 15.27 51.68 91.8 .355
DualAQD 11.16 43.45 94.9 .221
QD+ 11.83 50.17 93.7 .261
B
QD-Ens 12.95 73.09 95.6 .306
MC-Dropout-PI 10.83 47.18 94.4 .241
Fig.6. UncertaintymapscomparisonforfieldA.
DualAQD 18.48 59.96 96.6 .279
QD+ 22.27 62.02 93.9 .336
C
QD-Ens 17.75 39.93 63.8 .490
used as a representative field for presenting our results, since MC-Dropout-PI 17.15 50.61 89.3 .349
weobtainedsimilarresultsontheotherfields.Here,wedefine
the uncertainty map U =Yˆu−Yˆℓ as a map that contains the
PI width of each point of the field (darker colors represent
lower PI width and thus lower uncertainty). That is, the wider
thePIofagivenpoint,themoreuncertainitsyieldprediction.
We used four metrics to assess the behavior of the four
methods (Table III). First, we calculated the root mean square
error(RMSE )betweentheground-truthyieldmapY and
test
the estimated yield map Yˆ. Then, we considered the mean
prediction interval width (MPIW ) and prediction interval
test
probability coverage (PICP ). Note that k-fold or k ×2
test
cross-validation cannot be used in this experimental setting.
Thus,tohelpusexplaintheadvantagesofourmethodoverthe
others in the context of the HQ principle, we introduce a new
metricthatsummarizestheMPIW andPICP metrics
test test
shown in Table III. Let MPIW represent the mean PI
test
width after min-max normalization using as upper bound the
maximum MPIW value among the four methods in each
test
field. Let µ denote the weighted geometric mean between
ω
MPIW and (1−PICP ) (i.e., the complement of the
Fig.7. µω vs.ω comparisononyieldpredictiondatasets.
test test
PI coverage probability) with ω ∈ [0,1] being the relative
importance between both terms. Then
we yielded PICP values of at least 95% and better or
val
µ ω =(MPIW test )ω(1−PICP test )(1−ω). comparable MSE val values. In addition, the PI δval values
reported in Table I demonstrate that DualAQD is the method
According to the HQ principle that aims to obtain nar-
thatbestadaptedtothehighlyvaryinguncertaintylevelsofour
row PIs and high probability coverage, low µ values are
ω syntheticdataset.Thus,thePIboundsgeneratedbyDualAQD
preferable when comparing the performance of different PI-
were the closest to the ideal 95% PIs.
generation methods. Fig. 7 shows the comparison of the µ
ω Notice that DualAQD obtains lower MSE values than
val
metric obtained for each method on the three tested fields
QD+ consistently despite the fact that QD+ also includes
for different ω values. In order to summarize the behavior
an objective function that minimizes the error of the target
showninFig.7intoasinglemetric,wecalculatedtheintegral
predictions. The reason is that our method uses a NN (i.e.,
(cid:82)1
µ = µ dω. Since we seek to obtain low µ values for
0 ω ω f(·)) that is specialized in generating accurate target predic-
variousω,lowµvaluesarepreferable.BoldentriesinTableIII
tions, and its optimization objective does not compete with
indicate the method with the lowest µ.
others.Conversely,QD+usesalossfunctionthatbalancesfour
objective functions: minimizing the PI widths, maximizing PI
V. DISCUSSION coverage probability, minimizing the target prediction errors,
Our loss function Loss was designed to minimize and ensuring PI integrity. The NN used by QD-Ens, on the
DualAQD
the estimation error and produce narrow PIs simultaneously other hand, only generates the upper and lower bounds of the
whileusingconstraintsthatmaximizethecoverageprobability PIs. The target estimate is then calculated as the central point
inherently. From Tables I and II, we note that DualAQD between the PI bounds. As a consequence of not using a NN
consistentlyproducedsignificantlynarrowerPIsthanthecom- specialized in minimizing the target prediction error, QD-Ens
pared methods, according to the paired t-test performed at achieved the worst MSE val values of the compared methods,
the 0.05 significance level, except for the Protein dataset, except for the Year dataset.
where QD+ obtained comparable PI widths. Simultaneously, It is worth mentioning that one of the advantages of using
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 10
DualAQD over QD+ and QD-Ens is that we achieved better thatTableIIIshowsPICP valueslowerthan95%forfield
test
PIs while requiring less computational complexity. That is, A. During training and validation, the coverage probability
our method requires training only two NNs and uses MC- did reach the nominal value of 95%. Note that, since the
Dropout to account for the model uncertainty while QD+ and distribution of the test set (2020) differs from the one seen
QD-Ens require training ensembles of five NNs. In addition, during training (2016 and 2018), the PICP values may
test
QD+ requires extra complexity given that it uses a split not be equal to those obtained during training. This illustrates
normal aggregation method that involves an additional fitting theabilitytoshowincreaseduncertaintywheninsufficientdata
process for each data point during testing. Note that using is available for making reliable predictions.
deep ensembles of M models is expected to perform better or Fig. 6 shows that DualAQD was able to produce better
similar to MC-Dropout when using M forward passes [37]. distributedPIsforfield“A”(i.e.,withawiderrangeofvalues)
In other words, using an ensemble of five NNs, as QD whileachievingslightlybetterPICP andMPIW val-
test test
and QD+ do, is expected to perform better than using five uesthanQD-Ens.ThismeansthatDualAQDismoredynamic
forward passes through the NN using MC-Dropout. Neverthe- inthesensethatitoutputsnarrowerPIswhenitconsidersthere
less, during inference, we are able to perform not only five ismorecertaintyandwiderPIswhenthereismoreuncertainty
but 100 passes through the NN without significantly adding (recall the behavior in Fig. 3). As a consequence, 54.4%,
computationally cost. Our method becomes more practical in 44.3%, and 40.3% of the points processed by DualAQD on
thesensethat,evenwhenitusestheroughestimatesofmodel field “A” have smaller PI width than QD+, QD, and MC-
uncertaintyprovidedbyMC-Dropout,itisstillabletogenerate Dropout, respectively, while still being able to cover the
significantly higher-quality PIs. observedtargetvalues.Similarly,88.7%,65.3%,and49.9%of
In Fig. 5, we see the effect of using different scale factors the points processed by DualAQD on field “B” have smaller
η to update the balancing coefficient λ of Loss . PIwidththanQD+,QD,andMC-Dropoutwhilestillcovering
DualAQD
Notice that DualAQD produced wide PIs at the beginning the observed target values; and 62.5%, 6.0%, and 8.8% of the
of the training process in order to ensure PI integrity; as a points processed by DualAQD on field “C” have smaller PI
consequence, the PICP and PICP values improved width than QD+, QD, and MC-Dropout while still covering
train val
drastically.OncethegeneratedPIswerewideenoughtocover the observed target values.
most of the samples in the training set (i.e., PICP train ≈1), Finally, Fig. 6 shows that DualAQD indicates higher un-
DualAQDfocusedonreducingthePIwidthsuntilPICP train certainty in the lower (southern) region of the field, which
reachedthenominalprobabilitycoverageα.Therateatwhich received a nitrogen rate value that was not used in previous
PICP and MPIW were reduced was determined by the years(i.e.,itwasnotavailablefortraining).Similarly,regions
scale factor η. of high yield values are related to high nitrogen rate values;
Furthermore, Fig. 5a (η = 0.01) and Fig. 5b (η = 0.1) however, there exist considerably fewer training samples of
showthatbothmodelsconvergedtoasimilarMPIW val value this type, which logically would lead to greater uncertainty.
(∼15) despite having improved at different rates. It is worth Thus, there is more uncertainty when predicting regions that
noting that we did not find a statistical difference between received high nitrogen rate values, and this is represented
the results produced by the different η values that were tested effectivelybytheuncertaintymapgeneratedbyDualAQDbut
on all the datasets (i.e., η ∈ [0.001,0.1]), except for the case not the compared methods. It is worth mentioning that even
of Kin8nm. When various η values were considered equally though DualAQD showed some degree of robustness empiri-
as good for a given dataset, we selected the η value that cally when given previously unseen samples, neural network-
yielded the lowest average MPIW val , which was η = 0.01 based PI generation methods do not offer any guarantee for
for Boston, Concrete, and Yacht, η =0.005 for Kin8nm, and the behavior of the model for out-of-distribution samples.
η =0.05fortherestofthedatasets.Thisissignificantbecause
it shows that the sensitivity of our method to the scale factor
VI. CONCLUSION
η is low, unlike the hyperparameters required by QD-Ens, as
explained in detail in Sec. IV-B. What is more, our method Accurate uncertainty quantification is important to increase
requires a single hyperparameter, η, while QD-Ens requires the reliability of deep learning models in real-world applica-
two: λ and a softening factor used to enforce differentiability tions that require uncertainty to be addressed. In this work,
of its loss function; and QD+ requires four: λ , λ , and λ , we focus on methods that generate prediction intervals using
1 2 3
and the same softening factor used by QD-Ens. Note that our conventional deep neural networks for regression tasks. As
methoddoesnotneedanadditionalsofteningfactorgiventhat such, we presented a method that uses two companion NNs:
the functions of DualAQD are already differentiable. one that specializes in generating accurate target estimations
We see in Table III that DualAQD yielded better PICP and another that has two outputs and is trained using a novel
test
valuesthantheothermethods,exceptforfield“B”whereQD- loss function designed to generate accurate and narrow PIs.
Ens had the highest PICP value, albeit at the expense of We tested our method, DualAQD, with a challenging syn-
test
generating excessively wide PIs. What is more, Fig. 7 shows theticdatasetandsevenbenchmarkdatasetsusingfeedforward
that, in general, DualAQD obtained lower µ values; as a neural networks. We also experimented with a real-world
ω
consequence,itachievedthelowestµvalueineachofthethree application of 2D regression using spatially correlated data to
fields (Table III), which implies that it offers a better width- convey the usefulness and applicability of our PI generation
coveragetrade-offincomparisontotheothermethods.Notice method.Therefore,weconcludethatbyusingourlossfunction
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 11
Loss DualAQD , we were able to produce higher-quality PIs in [15] E.Simhayev,G.Katz,andL.Rokach,“Piven:Adeepneuralnetwork
comparisontoQD+,QD-Ens,andMC-Dropout-PI;thatis,our for prediction intervals with specific value prediction,” cs.LG, vol.
abs/2006.05139,2020.[Online].Available:arxiv.org/abs/2006.05139
methodgeneratedsignificantlynarrowerPIswhilemaintaining
[16] T.Salem,H.Langseth,andH.Ramampiaro,“Predictionintervals:Split
a nominal probability coverage without detriment to its target normalmixturefromquality-drivendeepensembles,”in36thConf.on
estimation accuracy. DualAQD was also shown to be more UncertaintyinArtificialIntelligence,J.PetersandD.Sontag,Eds.,vol.
124,03–06Aug2020,pp.1179–1187.
dynamic in the sense that it better reflects varying levels of
[17] M.Ganaie,M.Hu,A.Malik,M.Tanveer,andP.Suganthan,“Ensemble
uncertainty within the data. It is important to point out that deeplearning:Areview,”EngineeringApplicationsofArtificialIntelli-
we achieved better performance metrics than the competing gence,vol.115,p.105151,2022.
[18] R.M.Neal,Bayesianlearningforneuralnetworks. SpringerScience
algorithms using less computational complexity and fewer
&BusinessMedia,2012,vol.118.
tunable hyperparameters. In the future, we plan to adapt our [19] L. R. Chai, “Uncertainty estimation in bayesian neural networks and
loss function for its use in Bayesian neural networks. links to interpretability,” Master’s thesis, Department of Engineering,
UniversityofCambridge,2018.
[20] D.M.Blei,A.Kucukelbir,andJ.D.McAuliffe,“VariationalInference:
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Areviewforstatisticians,”JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssocia-
tion,vol.112,no.518,pp.859–877,2017.
TheauthorswishtothankthemembersoftheDataIntensive
[21] A. Wu, S. Nowozin, E. Meeds, R. Turner, J. Herna´ndez-Lobato, and
Farm Management project (USDA-NIFA-AFRI 2016-68004- A.Gaunt,“DeterministicvariationalinferenceforrobustBayesianneural
24769 and USDA-NRCS NR213A7500013G021) for their networks,”in7thInt.Conf.onLearningRepresentations,2019.
[22] P. Izmailov, W. Maddox, P. Kirichenko, T. Garipov, D. Vetrov, and
comments through the development of this work, especially
A. Wilson, “Subspace inference for bayesian deep learning,” in 35th
Dr. Paul Hegedus for collecting and curating the site-specific UncertaintyinArtificialIntelligenceConf.,Jul2020,pp.1169–1179.
data. We thank Jordan Schupbach for providing advice on the [23] J. Lu, J. Ding, C. Liu, and T. Chai, “Hierarchical-bayesian-based
sparse stochastic configuration networks for construction of prediction
experimental design.
intervals,”IEEETrans.NeuralNetworksandLearningSystems,vol.33,
no.8,pp.3560–3571,2022.
REFERENCES [24] J.Yao,W.Pan,S.Ghosh,andF.Doshi-Velez,“Qualityofuncertainty
quantificationforbayesianneuralnetworkinference,”2019.
[1] D.Ghimire,D.Kil,andS.-H.Kim,“Asurveyonefficientconvolutional [25] S. Farquhar, M. A. Osborne, and Y. Gal, “Radial bayesian neural net-
neuralnetworksandhardwareacceleration,”Electronics,vol.11,no.6, works:Beyonddiscretesupportinlarge-scalebayesiandeeplearning,”
2022. in Twenty Third Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, ser.
[2] V. Buhrmester, D. Mu¨nch, and M. Arens, “Analysis of explainers of ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearch,S.ChiappaandR.Calandra,
blackboxdeepneuralnetworksforcomputervision:Asurvey,”Machine Eds.,vol.108,26–28Aug2020,pp.1352–1362.
LearningandKnowledgeExtraction,vol.3,no.4,pp.966–989,2021. [26] B.Lakshminarayanan,A.Pritzel,andC.Blundell,“Simpleandscalable
[3] M. J. Colbrook, V. Antun, and A. C. Hansen, “The difficulty of predictiveuncertaintyestimationusingdeepensembles,”inAdvancesin
computing stable and accurate neural networks: On the barriers of NeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.30,2017.
deep learning and smale&#x2019;s 18th problem,” National Academy [27] L.ZhuandN.Laptev,“Deepandconfidentpredictionfortimeseriesat
ofSciences,vol.119,no.12,p.e2107151119,2022. Uber,”inIEEEInt.Conf.onDataMiningWorkshops(ICDMW),2017,
[4] A.Zarnani,S.Karimi,andP.Musilek,“Quantileregressionandcluster- pp.103–110.
ingmodelsofpredictionintervalsforweatherforecasts:Acomparative [28] J.Schupbach,J.W.Sheppard,andT.Forrester,“Quantifyinguncertainty
study,”Forecasting,vol.1,no.1,pp.169–188,2019. inneuralnetworkensemblesusingu-statistics,”in2020Int.JointConf.
[5] A. Ruospo and E. Sanchez, “On the reliability assessment of artificial onNeuralNetworks,2020,pp.1–8.
neural networks running on AI-oriented MPSoCs,” Applied Sciences, [29] A. Khosravi, S. Nahavandi, D. Srinivasan, and R. Khosravi, “Con-
vol.11,no.14,2021. structing optimal prediction intervals by using neural networks and
[6] E.D.Meenken,C.M.Triggs,H.E.Brown,S.Sinton,J.Bryant,A.D. bootstrap method,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks and Learning
Noble, M. Espig, M. Sharifi, and D. M. Wheeler, “Bayesian hybrid Systems,vol.26,no.8,pp.1810–1815,2015.
analytics for uncertainty analysis and real-time crop management,” [30] J.Lu,J.Ding,X.Dai,andT.Chai,“Ensemblestochasticconfiguration
AgronomyJournal,vol.113,no.3,pp.2491–2505,2021. networks for estimating prediction intervals: A simultaneous robust
[7] D. Tran, J. Liu, M. W. Dusenberry, D. Phan, M. Collier, J. Ren, training algorithm and its application,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks
K. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Mariet, H. Hu et al., “Plex: Towards reliability andLearningSystems,vol.31,no.12,pp.5426–5440,2020.
using pretrained large model extensions,” CoRR, vol. abs/2207.07411, [31] D.NixandA.Weigend,“Estimatingthemeanandvarianceofthetarget
2022.[Online].Available:arxiv.org/abs/2207.07411 probability distribution,” in Proceedings of IEEE Int. Conf. on Neural
[8] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Networks,vol.1,1994,pp.55–60.
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in 33rd Int. Conf. [32] N.Srivastava,G.Hinton,A.Krizhevsky,I.Sutskever,andR.Salakhut-
onMachineLearning,20–22Jun2016,pp.1050–1059. dinov, “Dropout:A simple way to prevent neuralnetworks fromover-
[9] A.Khosravi,S.Nahavandi,D.Creighton,andA.F.Atiya,“Comprehen- fitting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 56, pp.
sivereviewofNN-basedpredictionintervalsandnewadvances,”IEEE 1929–1958,2014.
Trans.NeuralNetworks,vol.22,no.9,pp.1341–1356,2011. [33] K. F. Wallis, “The two-piece normal, binormal, or double gaussian
[10] D.L.ShresthaandD.P.Solomatine,“Machinelearningapproachesfor distribution: Its origin and rediscoveries,” Statistical Science, vol. 29,
estimationofpredictionintervalforthemodeloutput,”NeuralNetworks, pp.106–112,2014.
vol.19,no.2,pp.225–235,2006. [34] D. Dua and C. Graff, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2019,
[11] A. Khosravi, S. Nahavandi, D. C. Creighton, and A. F. Atiya, “Lower https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php.
upperboundestimationmethodforconstructionofneuralnetwork-based [35] P. B. Hegedus, B. Maxwell, J. Sheppard, S. Loewen, H. Duff,
predictionintervals,”IEEETrans.NeuralNetworks,vol.22,no.3,pp. G.Morales,andA.Peerlinck,“Towardsalow-costcomprehensivepro-
337–346,2011. cess for on-farm precision experimentation and analysis,” Agriculture,
[12] T.Pearce,A.Brintrup,M.Zaki,andA.Neely,“High-qualityprediction vol.13,no.3,2023.
intervalsfordeeplearning:Adistribution-free,ensembledapproach,”in [36] G. Morales, J. W. Sheppard, P. B. Hegedus, and B. D. Maxwell, “Im-
35thInt.Conf.onMachineLearning,2018,pp.4072–4081. provedyieldpredictionofwinterwheatusinganoveltwo-dimensional
[13] X. Zhang, Z. Shu, R. Wang, T. Zhang, and Y. Zha, “Short-term load deep regression neural network trained via remote sensing,” Sensors,
interval prediction using a deep belief network,” Energies, vol. 11, vol.23,no.1,p.489,jan2023.
no.10,102018. [37] B.Lakshminarayanan,A.Pritzel,andC.Blundell,“Simpleandscalable
[14] I. M. Galva´n, J. M. Valls, A. Cervantes, and R. Aler, “Multi-objective predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in 31st Int.
evolutionary optimization of prediction intervals for solar energy fore- Conf.onNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2017,p.6405–6416.
castingwithneuralnetworks,”InformationSciences,vol.418-419,pp.
363–382,2017.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONNEURALNETWORKSANDLEARNINGSYSTEMS,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 12
GiorgioMorales(GS’21)isaPhDstudentincom-
puterscienceatMontanaStateUniversityandacur-
rent member of the Numerical Intelligent Systems
Laboratory (NISL). He holds a BS in mechatronic
engineering from the National University of Engi-
neering,Peru,andanMSincomputersciencefrom
MontanaStateUniversity,USA.Hisresearchinter-
estsaredeeplearning,explainablemachinelearning,
computervision,andprecisionagriculture.
John W. Sheppard (M’86–SM’97–F’07) received
his PhD in computer science from Johns Hopkins
University and is a fellow of the Institute of Elec-
tricalandElectronicsEngineers.HeisaNormAs-
bjornson College of Engineering distinguished pro-
fessor of computer science in the Gianforte School
of Computing of Montana State University. His
research interests include extending and applying
algorithms in deep learning, probabilistic graphical
models, and evolutionary optimization to a variety
ofapplicationareas,includingelectronicprognostics
andhealthmanagement,precisionagriculture,andmedicaldiagnostics.
