3102
tcO
03
]IN.sc[
1v8528.0131:viXra
Enabling Information Centric Networks through
∗
Opportunistic Search, Routing and Caching
Guilherme Domingues1, Edmundo deSouza eSilva1, RosaLea˜o1,Daniel S. Menasche´1
1UniversidadeFederal do RiodeJaneiro (UFRJ)
Rio deJaneiro, RJ –Brasil
Abstract. Content dissemination networks are pervasive in todays’ Internet.
Examples of content dissemination networks include peer-to-peer networks
(P2P), content distribution networks (CDN) and information centric networks
(ICN). In this paper, we propose a new system design for information centric
networks which leverages opportunistic searching, routing and caching. Our
system design is based on an hierarchical tiered structure. Random walks are
usedtofindcontentinsideeachtier,andgatewaysacrosstiersareusedtodirect
requests towards servers placed in thetop tier, which are accessed in case con-
tent replicas are not found in lower tiers. Then, we proposea model to analyze
thesysteminconsideration. Themodelyieldsmetricssuchasmeantimeto find
a content and the load experienced by custodians as a function of the network
topology. Usingthemodel,weidentifytradeoffsbetweenthesetwometrics,and
numericallyshowhowto findtheoptimaltimeto liveoftherandomwalks.
1. Introduction
In today’s Internet, there is a strong demand for content dissemination networks,
such as social networks (e.g. Facebook) and video networks (e.g. Youtube and
RIO [deSouzae Silvaet al. 2006]). To supportthis growingdemand, two broad classes
ofsolutions,supportedbyIPhost-to-hostcommunications,havebeen proposed: Content
DeliveryNetworks(CDNs) and Peer-to-Peer Networks (P2P).
InCDNs,dedicatedserversstorealltheinformationpublished. Copiesofpopular
contents are placed close to the users within cache servers. Users are automatically and
transparently re-directed to the most appropriate server by a central authority. Quality of
Service(QoS)andadvancedmonitoringtechniquesaredeployed,throughproprietaryso-
lutions,to redirect each userrequests(e.g., AkamaiNetworks). In CDNs, aset oforigin
servers store a copy of all published content. Popular contents are also stored in cache
servers close to users, so as to minimizethe service delay experienced by the requesters.
Requests for content are sent through IP routers to the central authority. Content flows
back tousers, alongtheIProuters.
In P2P systems, peers act as both client and servers for contents. Peers’ requests
are sent to other peers, from where content fragments (chunks) can be retrieved. Bittor-
rent and Emule are examples of P2P systems. As soon as peers have downloaded all
desired content chunks, they may either leave the system or remain as future providers
forchunks(seeders). Whileseeders,P2Pnodescanleavethesystemfordifferentreasons
(e.g., closing their connection to other peers, power failures, mobility). Indeed, there are
∗ThisresearchwassupportedinpartbygrantsfromCNPqandFAPERJ.
no guarantees on the time a seeder will remain present in a P2P system. If peers leave
thesystemimmediatelyafterconcludingtheirdownloads,contentmightbecomeunavail-
able which might lead to instability[Menasche´ et al. 2010]. Peers exchange information
through IP routers, but in contrast to CDNs, there are no dedicated servers to cache con-
tentclosetousers.
Accordingto [Ahlgrenet al. 2012],globaltrafficintheInternetwillincreasebya
factoroffour from2009 to 2014,approaching 64exabytes permonthin 2014,compared
to approximately 15 exabytes per month in 2009. Global mobile data traffic is expected
to double every year through 2014. Despite the tremendous success of CDNs and P2P
systems, they present issues if we consider the scalability and reliability envisioned for
next generation of content disseminationnetworks. With billionsofmobilenodes claim-
ingforcontents,centraldecisionpoliciesatCDNstendnottoscale. InP2Pnetworks,the
absence of dedicated cache servers close to users, as well as the lack of guarantees for a
peertoremain inthesystemafterobtainingthedesired content,hampersreliability.
Thescalabilityandreliabilitychallengesformassivedistributioncontentgaverise
to a new research area: Information Centric Networks (ICN) [Ghodsiet al. 2011]. In
ICNs, users know the name of a content being searched, before issuing requests. All
searchedcontentispreviouslystoredinthenetworkthroughsubscriptionstothenetwork.
Caching at all routers, also referred to as universal caching, is considered. Under uni-
versal caching, caching is provided to all users, and can be potentially implemented by
all routers, being pervasive along the entire network. Figure 1 exemplifies this scenario.
Questionsonhowtodeployefficientalgorithmstoexploreuniversalcachingandonhow
todefineinter-domainroutingpoliciesgiveriseto importantchallenges.
Figure1. ICNscenario
Figure 2 shows some of the most important ICN features. In ICNs, content is
published without any explicit destination address. Receivers subscribe to the network
through a query (request) for named contents. Users’ requests are forwarded by struc-
tured or non-structured topologies. When there is a matching between a query and a
stored content, content is delivered to the subscribers. During delivery, content might be
cached and replicated in the network. This strategy is known as in-networking caching.
Content can be sent to subscribers over TCP/IP transport mechanisms over paths which
are oblivious to the path taken by the requests. Alternatively, content can be sent in the
reverse path of requests trails stored across the caches. We reference caches in ICNs
henceforth ascache-routers.
In this article, our main contribution is a novel ICN architecture with routers dis-
Figure2. Publish/subscribeandcontentdistributionmechanisms
posed along hierarchical tiers domains, without a global lookup service to map names to
IPaddresses toall contentpresent inthenetwork:
• System design: We propose an opportunistic search algorithm to be executed
across hierarchical tiers. Random walks are used to opportunisticallyfind replicas of the
contentinsideatier. Ifnoreplicasarefound,requestsareforwardedtoanothertierinthe
direction of publish area servers, which maintain fixed copies of the content. This way,
we cope with the tradeoff between exploration of new routes to content replicas and ex-
ploitationofknownroutestofixedreplicas. Inaddition,wealsoproposeanopportunistic
caching policy using reinforced counters. The content placement and eviction policies
are targeted towards self-tuned storage mechanism which must distribute content in the
networktosatisfydemands thatvaryovertime.
• Analytical model: We propose an analytical model to evaluate ICNs inspired
by reliability theory concepts. The model yields metrics such as the mean time to find
a content and the load at the publishing areas as a function of the network topology and
thetimetolive(TTL)ofrequestsinsidedomains. Ourmodelallowsustostudytradeoffs
in the choice of the TTL. Smaller values of TTL might lead to a reduction in the time to
retrieveinformationat thecostofan increasein thesystem’sload at publishingareas.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related
work and a background on Information Centric Networks. Section 3 introduces the pro-
posed ICN system design, Section 4 contains the analytical model and in Section 5 we
present numerical results obtained with the proposed model. Section 6 concludes the
paper.
2. Related Work
The literature on ICN can be broadly classified into structured architectures, such as
[Koponenet al. 2007,Lagutin etal. 2010,2nd NetInfDescription2010]andunstructured
architectures, such as [Rosensweiget al. 2010,Kakidaet al. 2011]. In what follows, we
briefly describesomeoftheproposals.
Dona[Koponenet al. 2007]consistsofanhierarchyofdomains,whereinaresolu-
tion handler (RH) knows the IP location of all content published in descendent domains.
RHs placed in the highest domain are aware of all the content published in the entire
network. Psirp [Lagutinet al. 2010], Netinf [2nd NetInfDescription2010] and Mulit-
cache [Katsaroset al. 2011] are proposals that deploy Distributed Hash Tables (DHT),
enabling multiple logical entities to share the knowledge of all content published in the
network,inadistributedfashion. Eachcontentplacedinthenetworkismappedtoahash
key,witha hashkeybeing associatedwithasinglenodeoftheDHT.
DHTstructuresarehighlyscalable,butmayimposeconsiderableoverheadmain-
tenance costs [Chen etal. 2008]. Whenever a node fails or becomes repaired, requests
must be sent along the network to reassure the node location in the network. Neigh-
borhood adjacencies must be reestablished and file-index databases related to a partition
management must be resettled. Also, many unsolved security vulnerabilities are able to
disruptthepre-definedoperationofDHTsnodes [Urdanetaet al. 2011]. Atlast,inanet-
workcomposedofdomainswhereproviderscareaboutadministrativeautonomy,theuse
ofaglobalhashtableisunfeasible[D’Ambrosioet al. 2011].
Jacobsonetal.[Jacobson etal. 2009]proposeanonstructuredgeometrytopology
for routingrequests. Published content is announced through routing protocols, compos-
ing routing tables supporting name aggregation. Requests are routed towards publishing
areas leaving a trail called bread crumbs, so content follows the reverse paths set by the
trails, when sent to users. As content flows to users, the bread crumbs are consumed.
In general, content replicas will not be stored in the domain they were originally pub-
lished. Tobeencountered,routesforreplicasshouldbeintheroutingtables. Avoidingan
explosionofthesizeoftheroutingtablesbecomes an importantchallenge.
To enhance the discovery of cached contents, Rosensweig et
al. [Rosensweig et al. 2010] and Kakida et al. [Kakidaet al. 2011] allow bread crumbs
not to be consumed on the fly, when content traverses the network. This allows trails for
previously downloaded contents to be preserved. A new user request that reaches a trail
foradesiredcontentwillbesenttoacache-routerindicatedbythetrail,beforeflowingto
the publishing areas. Opportunistically downloading content from nearby cache-routers
may considerably reduce the time users take to retrieve information. Nevertheless, the
proposals encompassing the preservation of bread crumbs do not explicitly address how
publishedinformationwillbeannounced tofulfilltheroutingtables.
In this article, we avoid the drawbacks mentioned in this section, for both struc-
turedandunstructuredgeometrytopologies. Tothisaim,weproposeanovelarchitecture
withcache-routersdisposedacrosshierarchicaldomains. Users’requestsflowacrosstiers
towards the publishing areas. Random walks are issued to explore domains’ vicinity, so
as to allow opportunistic encounters with the desired content. That way, we avoid the
drawbacks of structured geometries, as well as the problem of fulfilling routing tables
whichiscommontotheunstructuredarchitectures discussedabove.
The model presented in this paper is inspired by reliability met-
rics [deSouzaeSilvaandMuntz1992]. The performance of random walks for
search in unstructured hybrid peer-to-peer systems has been analyzed by Ioannidis and
Marbach [Ioannidisand Marbach 2008]. Nonetheless, Ioannidis and Marbach focus
on asymptotic results when the number of nodes in the network grows to infinity, and
considered a single domain (tier). To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to analyze the performance of random walks for search in multi-tiered architectures,
accounting for the tradeoffs involved in the choice of the time to live of the random
walks. Existing multicache multi-tier normal cache overlay network either consider
global knowledge of content placement (CDN, P2P), or single path to the storage area
(CacheTrees). Noneofthesemethodsexplorethevicinityofacacheinafullydistributed
way.
3. System Design
Our architecture design considers logical hierarchical tiers (also called domains) com-
posed of cache-routers (i.e., routers that can store content replicas). We consider N
logical hierarchical tiers, in which tier 1 is the top level tier, and tier N constitutes the
bottom level. Routers in tier N are the only ones connected to users. Users publish con-
tent in storage areas connected to tier 1 routers. The interaction among the publishing
areas and tier 1 routers is better detailed in Figure 3. The figure displays a single pub-
lishingarea in tier1 and thelogical hierarchy ofcache-routers. Routers forward requests
towards publishing areas which contain permanent copies of the content. Replicas may
be cached in the cache-routers in the logical hierarchy. A strategy should be adopted to
allow opportunistic encounters between requests and replicas in a best-effort manner as
willbedetailedbelow. Opportunisticencountersare probabilisticinnature.
Figure3. ICNcontentdistributionmechanisms.
3.1. Content search: random walksand bread crumbs
Whenrequestsareissuedbyusersthecache-routersforwardthemtothepublishingareas.
Each cache-router oftier i is logicallyconnected to asubset of cache-routers in thesame
tier i and in the parent tier i − 1. When a request first reaches a tier, a random walk is
issued to find replicas of the content that may have been cached in that tier. The random
walk lasts for at most T unitsof time, and only traverses cache-routers in the samelevel.
That is, a counter is set to limit the amount of search time for a content within a level.
If the desired content is not found when this counter expires, the router (say router k at
level i) that holds the request at that time transfers it to level i−1, that is, to one of the
routers in level i− 1 router k is (logically) connected to. A new random walk will then
be issued, but now at level i−1. If the content been searched is found at a cache-router
of hierarchy j, it is sent to the user as it will be explained below. Otherwise, the request
will be forwarded up in the hierarchy until the publishing area (tier 1) is reached where
the content is guaranteed to be found (otherwise the content was never stored in the first
place). Note that the search does not generate significant traffic. Each request from a
usergenerates a singlesearch messagethat performs a random walk at onetier at a time.
Thetraffic dueto this request messageis negligibleas compared to that generated by the
contenttobetransferred.
As the requests are forwarded upwards across the hierarchy, a set of backward
pointersis maintained. Thosepointersare henceforth referred to as bread crumbs. When
a content is located in the network, it is delivered to the users following the reverse path
of the bread crumbs. As the content follows the path of bread crumbs, the trail is erased.
Random walks within domains do not generate bread crumbs. Therefore, when content
is delivered to users it does not follow the exact same path as the random walks. This
meansthatrandomwalksdonotimposeextrahops/sideeffectswhencontentisdelivered
to users. We usea set of counters, named reinforced counters (RCs), to keep track of the
load across the network for each content. The placement of replicas will be controlled
using the reinforced counters, which will be used to decide which and when contents
should be stored or evicted at each cache-router. Our approach is self-adaptive to users’
loads.
3.2. Content placement: reinforced counters
Each request carries a hash key inf to identify the content being searched for. As men-
tionedabove, a trail of bread crumbs is left at each cache-router traversed by therequest.
The trail includes a back pointer to the preceding router visited by the request (the bread
crumb), the hash key inf to identify the request and an associated counter (called re-
inforced counter) that is incremented when the request arrives at a cache-router. The
reinforced counter is used to determine whether the content associated with inf should
be stored at the cache-router. Each cache-router keeps a reinforced counter rc(inf), asso-
ciated to each hash key inf. Whenever a request for inf reaches a cache-router, rc(inf)
is incremented by one. When content is downloaded through the reverse path left by
the trails, bread crumbs are consumed but the reinforced counters are kept intact. Each
cache-router periodically decreases the reinforced counter rc(inf) associated to inf and
thisperiodisaparameter tobeset.
A reinforced counter rc(inf) for content inf at a cache-router has two thresholds:
rc-up(inf) andrc-low(inf). Ifrc(inf) reaches theupperthresholdrc-up(inf) thecontent
inf is cached at that cache-router after it is found and when it traverses the cache-router
towards to the user. Whenever rc(inf) reaches the lower threshold rc-low(inf) and if inf
iscachedatthatcache-router, thiscontentisimmediatelyremovedfromthecache-router.
Weassumethatcache-routers haveenoughstoragecapacitytostoreanycontentthatthey
are required to maintain. The reinforced counters mechanism allows popular contents to
betransferred fromthepublishingareas tothecache-routers. That way,theopportunistic
discovery of popular content is favored at cache-routers. In contrast, if demand is not
high enough to justify consumption of storage resources, reinforced counters will favor
theevictionofthecontent.
Weprovideadditionalinsightsontheconnectionbetweenreinforcedcountersand
contentplacement. Forsimplicityofexposition,andwithoutlossofgenerality,weassume
that content is demanded by users at a givenfixed rate. We then showthat the reinforced
countersfullydeterminecontentplacementatthecache-routers. Tothisaim,weconsider
a fluid approximation, where content requests arrive according to a flow with a given
intensity, and the reinforced counters are also approximated as being continuous. Let
Λ (inf) be the total load for inf arriving from tier l +1 at the m-th cache-router at tier
m,l
l. Let γ(inf) be the rate at which the reinforced counters rc(inf) are decremented. We
assume that the rc(inf) are initialized as rc-low(inf), so that if Λ (inf) = γ(inf) then
m,l
contentwillnotbestoredat m.
Proposition 3.1. Under the fluid approximation and an hierarchical tiered topology, a
cache-routerstoresa copyof inf ifand onlyif Λ (inf) > γ(inf).
m,l
Proof: The proof is inspired by [Rosensweig et al. 2013, Lemma 1]. In an hi-
erarchical network we define the direction of requests as upstream and the reverse as
downstream. Acache-routerisaffectedonlybyrequeststhatpassthroughit,andrequests
passthroughroutersonlyupstream,soupstreamcache-routersdonotimpactcache-router
m through their requests. Content flows downstream, but only passes through m for re-
quests that were issued by cache-router m. Therefore, the state and requests of upstream
routersdo notimpactthestateand requestsissuedby downstreamrouters.
We can determine if a cache-router will store a content in a bottom-up manner.
First, consider the leafs of the tiered topology. At such cache-routers, if Λ (inf) >
m,l
γ(inf) then rc(inf) will eventuallyreach rc-up(inf), and content will be stored and never
evicted. IfΛ (inf) ≤ γ(inf),incontrast,rc(inf)willremainequaltoitsinitialvaluerc-
m,l
low(inf). rc(inf) will afterwards remain fixed, and the cache-router, marked. Once leafs
are marked, we proceed upstream. Using the same argument as the one in the paragraph
above,wedeterminethecontentplacementatthenextcache-routerthathasallitschildren
marked,and soon, upto reaching routersat tier1, whereallcontent isstored. ✷
Givenaworkload,proposition3.1canbeusedtodeterminewhichdomainsacross
the network will hold a copy of each content, if we know the (probabilistic) choice by
which a router of level i passes requests to routers of level i − 1 at which it is logically
connected to. In the remainder ofthis paper we will assumethat the probabilitydistribu-
tionofcontent overcache-routers isfixed and givenforall cache-routers.
4. System Analysis
Inthissectionwepresent themodelanalysisforasingledomain(i.e., alogicaltier). Our
main goals are to derive the key metrics of interest, namely 1) mean time to find content
and2)thefractionofrequeststhathitthepublishingarea. Thesemetricsareimportantto
evaluatetheperformanceoftheproposedarchitecture. WeconsideranetworkofC cache-
routersinadomain. Figure4(a)illustratesadomainwithfivecache-routers. Assumethat
the desired content is stored at cache-routers 3, 4 and 5. Suppose that a request arrives
from a downstreamdomain to cache-router 2. Then, cache-router 2 starts a random walk
in the domain to find the content. Let T be the maximum time a request might spend
in a domain before being redirected to the upstream domain in the hierarchy. T is also
referred toas timeto live,orTTL.
We consider a continuous time random walk in which the time between walker
movements are exponentially distributed with rate ψ, with the associated infinitesimal
generating matrix Q. Let ∆(i) be the out-degree of node i and ψ the walker rate. Then,
all diagonal elements in Q are equal to −ψ, and q = ψ/∆(i) if there is a logical link
ij
fromitoj. Weuseuniformization [deSouza eSilvaand Gail2001]toobtainthemetrics
of interest. Let P be the uniformized matrix, obtained from Q as P = I + Q/Λ, where
Λ is a positive number greater than the maximum absolute value of the elements in the
diagonalofQ. Λis alsoreferred to astheuniformizationrate.
variable description
C numberofcache-routers in thenetwork
T timetolive
H(T) timetohitcontent
L(T) lifetimeofrandom walkin adomain
R(T) probabilityofnothittingcontentby T
T0 timecostforaccessing thepublishingarea
p probabilitythatcontentis indomain
Table 1. Table of notation. Time to live, T, is integer when considering discrete
timerandomwalks,andrealwhenconsideringcontinuoustimerandomwalks.
Let Ω (k) be the probability that, after k transitions of the uniformized process,
P
the random walk had not hit the desired content. To compute Ω (k) we construct a
P
modified transition matrix P, assuming that the desired content is placed in a subset of
cache-routers of the domain. Let ω be a column vector of size C where ω = p and p
i i i
is the probability that cachee-router i stores the content, C p = 1. To facilitate the
i=1 i
notation, we number the cache-routers where p > 0 with the highest indexes of matrix
i
P
P. In Figure4(a)theyare numbered3,4and 5. Then,P isdefined as
P = P(I −(diag(ω))) (1)
e
where diag(ω) is a matrix with the diagonal elements equal to vector ω and all other
e
elements equal to zero. P is a sub-stochastic matrix where the sum of the elements in
line i is the probability of not finding the content in the domain, in one step, given that
the random walk starts atecache-router i. The element (i,j) of P is the probability that a
random walker that starts at cache i moves to cache j in one step and then a cache miss
occurs atj. e
(a) (b)
Figure 4. (a) Example of a domain with five cache-routers and (b) Example of a
domainwitheightcache-routers.
Let π(0) be the initial state probability vector indicating from where the search
starts in the domain. The i-th element of π(0), π (0), corresponds to the probability that
i
the random walk starts at cache-router i. The (i,j) entry of matrix Pk characterizes the
probability of visiting state j after jump k, given that the system starts at state i. Let
υ e(k) be a vector whose m-entry is the probability that after k steeps a miss occurs at
P
cache-router m, given that therandom walk initial stateis π(0). The followingrecursion
can beusedto computeυ e(k),
P
υ e(k) = υ e(k −1)P, k > 0 (2)
P P
whereυ
P
e(0) = π(0). Then, Ω
P
(k) isgivenby
e
Ω
P
(k) = υ
P
e(k)U, k ≥ 0 (3)
whereUisacolumnvectorwithallelementsequal toone.
MeanTime toReach Content
RecallthatT isthemaximumtimetoliveofarandomwalkinadomain,T ∈ R. LetR(T)
bethe probabilitythat thecontent is not found by T unitsof time. Then, conditioningon
thenumberoftransitionsintheinterval[0,T],
∞
R(T) = ϕ(n,T)Ω (n) (4)
P
n=0
X
whereϕ(n,T) = exp(−ΛT)(ΛT)n/n!istheprobabilitythatnjumpsoccurintheinterval
[0,T]. Thenumberofjumpsintheinterval[0,T]isPoissondistributedasweuniformized
Q.
Next,ourgoalistocomputetheexpectedhittingtimeofacontent,E[H(T)]. The
expected hitting time of a content is the sum of two components. The first component
characterizesthemeantimetohitthecontentgiventhatitisavailableinthedomain,while
thesecondcomponentcharacterizesthemeantimetohitthecontentifitisunavailablein
thedomain. Incasethecontentisavailableinthedomain,thelifetimeoftherandomwalk
inthedomain(i.e.,thesearchingtimeinthedomain),L(T),istheminimumbetweenthe
timeuntilreaching thecontentand T. Themean ofL(T) isgivenby
T
E[L(T)] = R(t)dt (5)
0
Z
wherelim T→∞E[L(T)]isreferred toas meantimetoexit inthereliabilityliterature,and
can beevaluatedusingstandard techniques [deSouzaeSilvaandGail 2000].
Let p be the probability that the content is available in the considered domain. If
the content is available, the probability that the content is not found by time T is R(T).
If the content is unavailable, the random walk will take time T inside the domain, and
additional T0 units of time to reach the publishing area. Therefore, the expected hitting
timeofacontentis
E[H(T)] = (E[L(T)]+T0R(T))p+(T0 +T)(1−p) (6)
Replacing(4)into(6),andexchangingtheorderoftheintegrationandsummation,
yields,after simplification,
∞ n (ΛT)m
E[H(T)] = 1− e −ΛT Λ −1 Ω
P
(n)+T0R(T) p+(T0 +T)(1−p)
m!
n=0 m=0 ! !
X X (7)
The analysis above easily handles discrete time random walks, where time be-
tweenwalkers movementisfixed.
5. Experimental Results and System Analysis
In this section we present numerical results for a few examples in order to illustrate our
proposaland theexistingtradeoffs inthe choiceofparameter values. In thedevelopment
ofsection3,thetimeintervalsbetweentherandomwalkerstepscanbeeitherindependent
and exponentiallydistributedrandom variablesorconstant. Forthenumerical studieswe
considerconstantstepvalues.
Our goals are to 1) show the impact of different system parameters on the mean
time to find content and 2) evaluate the average load on publishing area servers, which
impacts both the time to recover a content and the system’s scalability. We analyze a
simple two-tier setup wherein the publishing area servers have finite capacity. This sim-
ple architecture suffices to highlight the key points we want to emphasize in this work
while keeping the model description short. From this scenario we also indicate how the
evaluationcouldeasilyconsidermultiplelogicaltiers.
Our reference topology is that illustrated in Figure 4(a). In this topology, there is
asinglecontentthat may be cached inone ofthecache-routers 3,4 or5 with equal prob-
ability of residing in any of these three routers, given it is in this logical tier. Therefore,
p = 1/3 foru = 3,4,5. With probability1−p = 0.5, thecontent does notresidein the
u
tier and it takes and additional T0 = 100 time units to find it in the publishing area. The
parameter T, the maximum time the random walker is allowed to search for the content
in a logical tier is varied between 1 and 200. The parameters values may vary according
totheexperimentalgoals.
5.1. SingleDomainCase
We illustrate how the mean time to find the content, E[H(T)], depends on different sys-
tem parameters. Figure 5(a) shows E[H(T)], obtained using (6), as a function of T, for
different values of p varying between 0 and 1, with increments of 0.2. The topology and
the content placement are kept fixed. Let T⋆ be the optimal value of T that minimizes
E[H(T)]. Astheprobabilitythatthecontentisavailableincreases,T⋆ increases. Clearly,
whenp = 0,T⋆ = 0,sinceifthecontentisnotavailableinthetieritisbetternottosearch
forit. On theotherhand, when thecontent is always available(p = 1), T⋆ → ∞. This is
because, in thisexample,T0 is largecompared to themean timeto find thecontent inthe
tier(E[H(∞)]). Inthisscenario,itwilltakelesstime,onaverage, fortherandomwalker
to find the content in the domain, as opposed to find it in the publishing area servers, if
the walker is given enough time to search for the content in the domain (i.e., if T is very
large). For values of p between (0,1), the optimum value T⋆ can be obtained from our
modelas showninFigure 5(a).
Foranygivenvalueofp,Figure5(a)showsthatE[H(T)]firstdecreases andthen
increases, except for p = 0 and p = 1, when E[H(T)] always increases and decreases,
respectively. In any case, E[H(T)]asymptoticallygrowsat rate 1−p, as can be inferred
from equation (6). The impact of T0 (the time cost for accessing the publishing area
servers) on E[H(T)] is illustrated in Figure 5(b), which shows E[H(T)] as a function of
T,forT0 ∈ [100,200,...,600]. AsT0 decreases, thereisasubtledecreaseoftheoptimal
time to find a content in the domain. This is because, as the time to access publishing
area servers increases, it is beneficial to remain longer in the domain before forwarding
therequest tootherdomains.
(a) (b)
Figure5. EffectofpandT0 ontheexpectedhittingtime
Untilnowweanalyzedtheproblemofcontentdiscoveryfromtheclientsperspec-
tive. The administrators of publishingareas, in turn, might worry about the traffic that is
incurredintheirservers. Ifcontentisavailableinthecache-routersinatier,theloadfrom
that domain to the servers (assuming a single tier architecture) is proportional to R(T),
theprobabilitythatusersdonotfindthecontentinthetierbytimeT. Inmoredetail,letλ
andΛbetheaverageuserload(numberofrequestsforacontentpertimeunit)thatarrives
to a tier and the average load flowing from the tier to the next in the hierarchy (or from
thetierto thepublishingarea), respectively. Thenumberofrequests per unittimeserved
insidethedomainisclearly λ−Λ andΛ = R(T)λ. Fortheplotsweconsiderλ = 100.
Figures6(a)and6(b)showhowΛvariesasafunctionofT. Figures6(a)considers
the reference scenario, modified so that content may be available at caches 2, 3, 4 and 5
with probability0.25 at each, giventhe desired content is in the domain. Figures 6(b), in
turn, is generated from the topology with 8 caches shown in Figure 4(b), where content
may be available at caches 5, 6, 7 and 8 with probability 0.25 at each, given the desired
contentisin thedomain. Theotherparameters are thesameas in thereference scenario.
Figures 6(a) and 6(b) indicate that there is a tradeoff between users interests and
providers time-cost when choosing the optimal value of T. If T is selected so as to min-
imize E[H(T)], the rate at which the publishing area servers are accessed, Λ might be
considerably large. However, a slight increase in T and E[H(T)] might yield significant
reductions in Λ. Therefore, we may minimize E[H(T)] constraining Λ to a given (rela-
tivelysmall)value,that is,wemay beabletokeep theload at thepublishingarea servers
atalowvalueandyetavoidingaconsiderableincreaseinthetimetoretrievethesearched
content.
Note that in Figure 6(b) Λ is constant for T ≤ 3. This is because we are con-
sidering a discrete time random walk for the studies. In this case, the probability that
the content is found inside the domain is zero if T is smaller than the distance between
the source of the random walker and the cache-router that may have the content. In a
continuoustimerandomwalk, inturn,R(T) isstrictlydecreasing withrespect toT.
We may summarize the above findings as follows. If content is available in a tier
with high probability, it may be advantageous to increase the time the random walker is
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
140
Ε[Η(Τ)]
Λ
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
T
Ε[Η(Τ)]
Λ
T
(a) (b)
Figure 6. Probability of not hitting content by time T, E[H(T)], and Λ, for (a) 5
cachetopology,(b)8cachetopology.
allowedtosearchforacontentinthetiertoreducetheloadatthepublishingareaservers.
On the otherhand, theexpected timeto find the content may increase. Quantifyingthese
tradeoffsis acontributionofourwork.
5.2. MultipleDomainCase
IntheprevioussectionweassumedaconstanttimeT0 toretrieveacontentfromthepub-
lishing area servers. In what follows we consider a scenario where content that is not
found in a domain is forwarded to publishing area servers with limited capacity. There-
fore, the time cost to access the publishing area servers, T0 , will now be a function of
the amount of traffic Λ that is directed to the publishing area servers (which in turn is a
function of R(T)). To illustrate the impact of the load of users on the publishing area
servers, let us a consider a simple M/M/1 model for the server, with associated service
capacity µ. Then, the mean waiting time experienced by users accessing the server is
W = 1/(µ−Λ). Figure 7(a) shows how W varies as a function of Λ. In what follows,
forillustrationpurposes,weset µ = 40and T0 = 1000W,
T0 = 1000/(µ−R(T)λ) (8)
Figure 7(b) illustrates the impact of the service capacity on the mean waiting time expe-
rienced by users and shows how E[H(T)] varies as a function of T. The qualitative be-
havior of E[H(T)] is the same as the one observed previously, and the insights obtained
in Section 5.1 about the tradeoff in the choice of T still apply. Note that an increase in
R(T), the probability of not finding the searched content in the tier (not shown in the
figure) may degrade users performance, as it may lead to server overload. In particular,
if T is small (e.g., T = 1), E[H(T)] grows unbounded with λ. Due to space limitations
we were only able to discuss a few examples aiming at describing our proposal and the
existing design tradeoffs. Our approach, however, can handle multipledomains and user
loads as we briefly sketch below. From the results of section 4 and given the user loads,
wecanobtainthedomainsthatholdcopiesofthecontent. R(T)isthenusedtoobtainthe
loads at each domain as well as at the publisher. Finally, given the loads at the different
domains,E[H(T)]isobtainedinatopdownfashion,startingfromthetopandmovingto
thelowestleveldomains.
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 10 20 30 40
W
µ=10
100
µ=20
µ=30
80 µ=40
60
40
20
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Λ
])T(H[E
λ=5
λ=10
λ=15
λ=20
λ=25
λ=30
T
(a) (b)
Figure7. (a)AverageserverprocessingtimeasafunctionofΛ,(b)meantimeto
findcontent,accountingforservercapacityµ=40.
6. Conclusion
Information centric networks are gaining considerable attention from researchers and
practitioners due to their scalability and robustness properties. Nonetheless, there are
still important challenges in the design, modeling and analysis of such networks. From
the design perspective, one of the challenges is to determine how to fill out the routing
tables. From the modeling and analysis perspective, the challenges are associated to the
large number of routers envisioned in ICNs. In this paper, we have proposed a novel de-
signforICNsthatisbuiltontopofrandomwalksandhierarchicaltiers(domains)tocope
withtheexplorationversusexploitationtradeoffinvolvedin contentsearch.
Our model computes metrics such as mean time to find a content and evaluate
existing tradeoffs to tune the parameters of the architecture we propose. In this present
work we focus on the performance tradeoffs of the architecture. However, our analytical
modelcanbeextendedtostudythescalabilityoftheproposedarchitecturewithrespectto
othersintheliterature. Forinstance,astheuserloadforacontentgrowswhatistheoverall
increase in the expected time to find a content as compared to a P2P architecture. This
workalsoopensadditionalavenuesforfutureresearch. Onesuchproblemistodetermine
theimpactofparallelrandomwalksacrosstiersat thesamelevelofthehierarchyaswell
as acrossdifferent levels.
References
[2ndNetInfDescription2010] 2nd NetInf Description (2010). Netinf.
http://www.4ward-project.eu/.
[Ahlgrenet al. 2012] Ahlgren,B., Dannewitz,C., Imbrenda,C., Kutscher,D., andOhlman,
B. (2012). A survey of information-centricnetworking. IEEE Communications Mag-
azine,50(7):26–36.
[Chen et al. 2008] Chen, S., Zhang, Z.,Chen, S., andShi, B. (2008). Efficient filesearch in
nonDHT P2Pnetworks. ElsevierComputer Communications,31(2):304–317.
[D’Ambrosioet al. 2011] D’Ambrosio, M., Dannewitz, C., Karl, H., and Vercellone, V.
(2011). MDHT: A hierarchical name resolution service for information-centric net-
works. In Proc.ofSIGCOMM workshoponICN, pages 7–12.
[deSouzaeSilvaand Gail 2000] de Souza e Silva, E. and Gail, H. R. (2000). Transient
Solutions for Markov Chains. In Grassmann, W., editor, Computational Probability,
pages 44–79.Kluwer.
[deSouzaeSilvaand Gail 2001] de Souza e Silva, E. and Gail, H. R. (2001). The Uni-
formization Method in Performability Analysis. In B. R. Haverkort, R. Marie, G. R.
andTrivedi,K.S.,editors,PerformabilityModelling: TechniquesandTools,chapter3,
pages 31–58.Wiley.
[deSouzaeSilvaet al. 2006] deSouzaeSilva,E.,Lea˜o,R.M.M.,Santos,A.D.,Azevedo,
J. A., and Netto, B. C. M. (2006). Multimedia Supporting Tools for the CEDERJ
Distance Learning Initiative applied to the Computer Systems Course. In 22th ICDE
WorldConferenceon DistanceEducation,pages 1–11.
[deSouzaeSilvaand Muntz1992] de Souza eSilva, E. and Muntz,R. R. (1992). Me´todos
Computacionais de Soluc¸a˜o de Cadeias de Markov: Aplicac¸o˜es a Sistemas de
Computac¸a˜o eComunicac¸a˜o. SBC -EscoladeComputac¸a˜o.
[Ghodsiet al. 2011] Ghodsi, A., Schenker, S., Koponen, T., Singla, A., Raghavan, B., and
Wilcox, J. (2011). Information-centric networking: Seeing the forest for the trees. In
Proc.ofHOTNETS, pages 1–6.
[Ioannidisand Marbach 2008] Ioannidis, S. and Marbach, P. (2008). On the design of
hybrid peer-to-peer systems. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review,
36(1):157–168.
[Jacobsonet al.2009] Jacobson, V., Smetters, D. K., Thornton, J. D., Plass, M. F., Briggs,
N. H., and Braynard, R. L. (2009). Networking named content. In Proc. of CoNEXT,
pages 1–12.
[Kakidaet al. 2011] Kakida,M.,Tanigawa,Y.,andTode,H.(2011). Breadcrumbs+: Some
extensionsofnaivebreadcrumbs for in-network guidancein content centric networks.
In Proc.ofIEEE IPSJ, pages376–381.
[Katsaroset al. 2011] Katsaros,K.,Xylomenos,G.,andPolyzos,G.C.(2011). Multicache:
An overlay architecture for information-centric networking. Elsevier Computer Net-
works, 55(4):936–947.
[Koponenet al. 2007] Koponen,T.,Chawla, M.,Chun, B. G.,Ermolinskiy,A.,Kim,K. H.,
Shenker, S., and Stoica, I. (2007). A data-oriented (and beyond)network architecture.
In Proc.ofSIGCOMM, pages 181–192.
[Lagutinetal. 2010] Lagutin,D.,Visala,K.,andTarkoma,S. (2010). Publish/subscribefor
internet: PSIRP perspective. In Emerging Trends from European Research, (Valencia
FIA book2010).
[Menasche´ et al. 2010] Menasche´,D.S.,Rocha,A.A.,deSouzaeSilva,E.,Lea˜o,R.M.M.,
Towsley, D., and Venkataramani, A. (2010). Estimating self-sustainability in peer-to-
peerswarmingsystems. Perf.Eval., 67(11):1243–1258.
[Rosensweiget al. 2010] Rosensweig,E.,Kurose,J.,andTowsley,D.(2010). Approximate
modelsforgeneral cachenetworks. In Proc.of INFOCOM, pages 1–9.
[Rosensweiget al. 2013] Rosensweig, E., Menasche´, D., and Kurose, J. (2013). On the
steady-stateofcache networks. InProc.of INFOCOM, to appear.
[Urdanetaet al.2011] Urdaneta, G., Pierre, G., and Steen, M. V. (2011). A survey of DHT
securitytechniques. ACM Comp. Surveys, 43(2).
