1
ePython: An implementation of Python for the
many-core Epiphany coprocessor
Nick Brown
EPCC
James Clerk Maxwell Building
Edinburgh
nick.brown@ed.ac.uk
Abstract—The Epiphany is a many-core, low power, low on- such as the Epiphany. By carefully designing an approach
chip memory architecture and one can very cheaply gain access that takes advantage of the CPU during Python interpretation
to a number of parallel cores which is beneficial for HPC
we can support the user writing Python parallel codes on
education and prototyping. The very low power nature of these the Epiphany. This is aimed at education and prototyping,
architectures also means that there is potential for their use in
future HPC machines, however there is a high barrier to entry where even novices can exploring the computational and
in programming them due to the associated complexities and paralleltechniquesthatHPCprogrammersadoptonlargescale
immaturity of supporting tools. modern supercomputers. After discussing the Epiphany and
In this paper we present our work on ePython, a subset of related work by the community in more detail in section
Python for the Epiphany and similar many-core co-processors.
2, section 3 focuses in ePython itself. In this section we
Duetothelimitedon-chipmemorypercorewehavedevelopeda
new Python interpreter and this, combined with additional sup- consider some of the general support for parallelism and
portforparallelism,hasmeantthatnovicescantakeadvantageof runninghybridonboththeCPUandEpiphany,wedescribethe
PythontoveryquicklywriteparallelcodesontheEpiphanyand architecture of ePython in more detail before examining the
explore concepts of HPC using a smaller scale parallel machine. performanceandprogrammabilityofanexampleGauss-Seidel
ThehighlevelnatureofPythonopensupnewpossibilitiesonthe
computational code. In section 4 we discuss interoperability
Epiphany, we examine a computationally intensive Gauss-Seidel
code from the programmability and performance perspective, with an existing Python interpreter running on the host and
discuss running Python hybrid on both the host CPU and consider a heterogeneous example, where full Python on the
Epiphany,andinteroperabilitybetweenafullPythoninterpreter host offloads computation to the Epiphany cores (in this
on the CPU and ePython on the Epiphany. The result of this case number sorting), before draw conclusions and discussing
work is support for developing Python on the Epiphany, which
further work in section 5.
canbeappliedtoothersimilararchitectures,thatthecommunity
have already started to adopt and use to explore concepts of
parallelism and HPC.
II. BACKGROUND
EachEpiphanycorecomeswithitsownlocal,32KBofon-
Index Terms—Parallel programming, Scientific computing,
Accelerator architectures, Multicore processing, Computer lan- chip memory and is interlinked to other cores via eMesh, a
guages, Runtime library, Parallel machines, Supercomputers fastinterconnectarrangedina2Dmeshwithnearestneighbour
direct connections. Each processor core in the Epiphany chip
consistsofaRISCCPU,highbandwidthlocalmemory,DMA
I. INTRODUCTION
engine and network interface. Performance levels close to
The Epiphany coprocessor [1] has been developed by 2 GFLOP/s per core have been demonstrated [3] in signal
Adapteva and is packaged as a single chip component com- processing kernels and this architecture is applicable to a
prising of many of processing cores. The Parallella single widerangeofuseswhichincludemanyHPCcodes.Adapteva
board computer [2] has been built around the Epiphany chip have sold 64 core and 16 core Epiphany coprocessors but
and combines it with a host ARM CPU. The most common the architecture, which is designed for scalability, has been
Parallella ships for $99 and provides a 16 core Epiphany III demonstrated with up to 4096 cores and a production 1024
withadualcorehostARM.WhilstAdaptevasellthishardware core version (the Epiphany V) has been announced [4] which
as supercomputing for everybody due to the low price point, is compatible with previous generations and will be available
actually programming this machine is time consuming and of inearly2017.Themostcommonversionincurrentcirculation
considerable difficulty to novices. Being able to write high is the 16 core Epiphany III (32 GFLOP/s theoretical peak
level parallel code and then experiment with parallelism in performance), with each core having 32KB of local memory
Pythonwouldbeofgreatadvantageforbotheducationandfast distributedacrossfour8KBbanks.Itisexpectedthat,asthear-
prototyping, however the limited amount of per core memory chitecture becomes more mature, then Epiphany coprocessors
(32KB) available on the Epiphany means that it is impractical withafargreaternumbersofcoreswillbecomemorecommon
to port an existing Python interpreter. place.Inthispaperwefocusonthe16coreEpiphanyIIIchip
In this paper we present our work on supporting a subset duetoitsubiquity,grantedthisismoremulti-corethanmany-
of Python on high core count, low on-chip memory devices core but the concepts and implementation discussed here can
0202
tcO
82
]CD.sc[
1v72841.0102:viXra
2
easily be applied to both single coprocessors with very many that,eventhoughAdaptevasoldtheParallellaasdemocratising
more cores (such as the announced 1024 core Epiphany V) supercomputing, few people have the expertise to be able to
and also multiple coprocessors interconnected via Adapteva’s write even a simple parallel code for the Epiphany and this
eMesh technology. has meant that many people have purchased the machine and
The Parallella single board computer comprises of a dual then been unable to use it.
core ARM A9 CPU and 1GB host RAM, 32MB of which is As well as the low cost of the Epiphany, one of the other
reservedassharedmemorywhichboththehostandEpiphany major advantages is its energy efficiency, with the 16 core
coprocessor can directly access. With a price point starting at EpiphanyIIIconsuminglessthan2Wattsofpower[8].Energy
$99thishasbeendevelopedasalowcostmeansofleveraging efficiency is generally seen as major challenge to reaching
HPC as well as a technology demonstrator for the Epiphany exa-scale and an architecture, for instance the Epiphany III,
itself. The Linux OS is shipped with the Parallella, like many that candeliver 32 GFLOP/stheoretical peakperformance for
accelerators the Epiphany is bare metal and has no operating less than 2 Watts is of great interest for reaching our energy
system. Both the Parallella and Epiphany are open platforms, targets for exa-scale machines. The announced Epiphany V
where all details such as the documentation, designs and is predicted to deliver 75 GFLOPS/Watt [4]. Instead of large
entire source code are fully and freely available for anyone power hungry processors there is interest in utilising these
touse.Adaptevaarekeenforthecommunitytodeveloptools, verymanylowpower,lowmemorycoresbuttheprogramming
techniques and technologies which take advantage and make challengesassociatedwithtakingadvantageofthesearesignif-
novel use of the Parallella and Epiphany. icant. This technology is also of great interest for parallelism
UpuntilnowtheprogrammeroftheEpiphanyco-processor in embedded devices, such as smart phones, where both
has only had a choice between writing their code in assembly performance and energy efficiency are crucially important.
or C. Commonly two executables are built, one launched on Being able to effectively program and experiment with these
the host CPU and the other on the Epiphany cores. Shared sorts of technologies will be key to their future development
memoryisthenusedforcommunicationandthemarshalingof and acceptance by the HPC community.
controlflowbetweenthehostanddevice.Anopensourcelow To enable both education and fast prototyping, support for
level API has been developed which allows the programmer writing Python code is an obvious activity. However the lim-
to call specific functions from their C code, such as installing ited, 32KB, memory per core provides a significant challenge
interrupt timers and utilising the DMA engines of the cores. here. A full Python interpreter, such as CPython [9] and
However even with the API, writing code for the Epiphany associated libraries will nowhere near fit in a core’s memory
directly is fraught with difficulties, such as data consistency, andinadditionwealsoneedtoplacetheuser’scodeanddata
differentdataalignmentsonthehostandEpiphanyandhaving in this same space. Other technologies such as Numba [10]
to carefully select the appropriate linker script. As is common existwhichcanJITcompilecodeforGPUsorCPUs,butagain
with these sorts of devices, the Epiphany has no IO connec- the compiled code and libraries are far too large to fit within
tivity, so novices can find it very difficult to debug their code an Epiphany core’s memory. Even Python resources aimed at
where they would simply add a print statement to CPU code. embedded devices require Megabytes rather than Kilobytes of
There have been a number of technologies developed, with memory to run. There has been work done supporting Python
varying degrees of maturity, to support programming the forthemany-coreKnightsLandingarchitecture[11],however
Epiphany, such as COPRTHR[5], a threaded MPI [6] and KNL has vastly more memory than the Epiphany and as such
OpenSHMEM [7] but these still require the programmer to this work is not directly applicable here.
addressthelimitedamountofon-chipmemorypercore,tostill
worry about the tricky lower level details of the architecture III. EPYTHON
and write their code in C. In addition to the on-chip memory The ePython interpreter has been developed to support a
thereisanadditional32MBofCPUmainmemoryavailableto subset of Python on the Epiphany co-processor. The pro-
be shared between the host and Epiphany. One might assume grammer writes their Python code and executes it via the
that the on-chip memory would be best viewed as cache, ePython tool on the Parallella which then interprets the code
however because of a lack of hardware cache support and and executes it on the Epiphany. It is mainly the imperative
the slow transfer speeds from host memory it is preferable to aspects of Python that are currently supported with a number
maximise the use of on-chip memory and this is often viewed of extensions for parallelism provided as importable modules.
as “main memory” rather than cache, with the shared host The intention of ePython has been to allow a complete novice
memory avoided for code or program data. To put this in to write their first simple parallel Python code and run this on
perspective libc is far larger than 32KB, so if one wishes to the Epiphany in one minute or less.
use common C functionality such as string handling, maths
functionality or memory allocation then they have to locate 1 from parallel import *
2
libc in shared main memory and take the performance hit or
3 print ”Hello world from core ”+str(coreid ()
implement ones own common C functionality but this adds to )+” of ”+str(numcores())
thecomplexityofusercodeanddevelopmenttime.Inshortthe
Listing1. Pythonparallelhelloworldcode
existingwaysofprogrammingtheEpiphanyareneitheracces-
sibletothenovicenordotheyencouragefastdevelopmentand Listing1illustratesasimplehelloworldPythoncodewhere
prototype experimentation with the architecture. The result is each Epiphany core will display the message with its core
3
ID and total number of Epiphany cores. The coreid and
numcores functions are located in the parallel module which
is imported on line 1. One of the challenges of devices such
astheEpiphanyisthatcodesrunningonthesecannotinteract
with the user, not being able to display information to stdio
is especially difficult when people are trying things out and
debugging. ePython abstracts all of this from the programmer
and supports user interaction (both output and input) from
Python code running on any Epiphany core transparently.
1 from parallel import *
2
3 if coreid ()==0:
4 send(20, 1)
Fig.1. ePythoninterpreterarchitecture,wherebytecodegenerationisdone
5 elif coreid ()==1: onthehostandthentransmittedtotheEpiphanycores.Thehostalsorunsas
6 print ”Got value ”+str(recv(0))+” from amonitortoperformactivitiessuchasIOwhendirectedbytheEpiphany
core 0”
Listing2. Pythonpointtopointcommunicationexample
on a subset of Epiphany cores and specify more advanced
Point to point message passing communication calls form placement information such as utilising only a range of cores
a crucial part of many parallel codes, listing 2 illustrates a for their code. It was mentioned in section II that in addition
Pythoncodetosendthevalue20fromEpiphanycore0atline to each Epiphany core’s 32KB of local memory there is
4 to core 1 which issues a receive (line 6) and displays the also 32MB of slow shared host memory which can also be
resultingvalue.Scalarsorlistsofintegers,reals,booleansand accessed. By default ePython will try to locate everything
stringscanbecommunicatedandcurrentlyallcommunications (the code and data) in the core’s memory, but it is possible
are blocking. In the case of communicating lists either the via command line options to override this and control which
length of the list or an additional argument, if it is provided, memory is used for what.
will determine the number of elements to send or receive. In
this example all other Epiphany cores (cores 2 to 15) will A. Architecture
execute the conditional statements but effectively do nothing
Due to the limitations of the Epiphany coprocessor and
as their core ids do not match.
compilers, the ePython interpreter is written in C with sup-
1 from parallel import * porting Python modules that the programmer can import.
2 from random import randint Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of ePython, due
3
to the limited on core memory we aim to do as much of the
4 a=reduce(randint(0,100) , ”max”)
preparation of user code as possible on the host CPU and
5 print ”The highest random number is ”+str(a
) only run the minimal amount on the Epiphany required to
actuallyexecutethecode.Aprogrammer’sPythoncodeisfirst
Listing3. Pythoncollectivereductionexample,findingthemaximum
preprocessedandthenparsedonthehosttoformaparsetree,
randomnumberheldonanEpiphanycore
which is then operated upon to form byte code. For memory
Anotherimportantaspectofmanyparallelcodesarecollec- reasons this byte code is different to Python’s standard byte
tivecommunications,whereallcoresareinvolvedinaspecific codeandoptimisedtobeassmallaspossible.Eachentryinthe
communication to determine the result. Listing 3 illustrates a byte code starts with the “command” (such as conditional or
reductioninPython,whereeachEpiphanycorewillgeneratea variable assignment) which is 1 byte, the command will then
random number between 0 and 100, this is then reduced (line haveanumberofdifferentpropertiesassociatedwithitsuchas
3) via the reduce function call with the operator (in this case variableidentifiers(each2bytes),operators(1byte),constants
“max”) as an additional argument. In this case the maximum (4 bytes), memory addresses (4 bytes) and relative locations
random number generated by any core is selected and this in the byte code to jump to (2 bytes.) These commands are
is communicated to every other core which then stores it in then appended sequentially to form the overall byte code and
variable a. Each core then displays its value of a (line 4) transferred to a portion of the shared memory, along with
whichwillbeidenticalonthemall.Otheroperators,min,sum commands for activating the Epiphany cores.
and prod are also supported. ePython’s parallel module also On the Epiphany itself the byte code is copied from shared
provides a bcast function call which will broadcast a value memory into the local memory of each core. The interpreter
from one specific root Epiphany core to every other core. then runs which reads in each command from the byte codes
InalltheseexamplestheprogrammerexecutestheirPython andprocessesit.Thisinterpreteralsomaintainsastackareafor
code in the standard way of saving it as a file and then each function call and heap for lists and strings. Larger codes
providing the filename as an argument to the epython exe- or lists will transparently “flow over” to an area of the 32MB
cutable run from bash on the Parallella host. There are also sharedmemorywhichisreservedforeachcore.Thiswillhave
a variety of other options which configure the specifics of a performance impact but enables larger, more complex codes
how the code should be executed, for instance one can run to execute. Figure 2 illustrates ePython’s memory map for
4
Figure1alsoillustratesaninterpreterandaruntimerunning
on the host, the interpreter is designed to be very portable
between architectures and it is only the runtime that is tied to
thespecificsofthetechnology.Togofromonearchitectureto
another, only a new runtime needs to be developed and a host
runtime has been written so that, in addition to running code
ontheEpiphanycores,theprogrammercanalsoruntheircode
on the Parallella’s dual core ARM CPU at the same time. For
memory reasons the interpreter itself is designed to support
the minimum amount of functionality that ePython requires
and the Python modules that come with ePython (such as
parallel and util) contain higher level functionality which is
imported by the programmer if required. During the parsing
stage on the host, memory optimisation is also performed
to omit unused functions that the programmer might have
importedintotheircodebutnotused.IndevelopingePython’s
Epiphany runtime a major advantage is that this is an open
platform with all the documentation, source code and even
designs of the Epiphany open and freely available, such work
on a proprietary/closed platform would have been far more
difficult and time consuming.
B. Virtual cores
Fig.2. ePythonmemorymapforeachEpiphanycore’s32KBSRAM
As mentioned in section III-A ePython has been written in
suchawaythattheinterpreterishighlyportableanditisonly
the runtime that is specific to an architecture. In addition to
an Epiphany core, where the first 24KB is taken up with the
support for the Epiphany we have also developed variations
interpreter and runtime. After this there is a section reserved
of these that run on the Parallella’s dual core ARM CPU.
for global variables (this is dynamic and in this example 50
These are known as virtual cores, for all intents and purposes
bytes is allocated), next is the byte code itself (again dynamic
they look like fully fledged Epiphany cores to the Python
and in this example 1.4KB), next is the communications
programmer, operate and communicate as such, but instead
area (fixed at 256 bytes) which supports message passing
each is running within a thread on the CPU. The number
functionality. 1KB is then reserved for the stack and the
of virtual cores is defined as an argument to the epython
remaining memory for the heap.
executable and the core ids follow on sequentially from the
The Epiphany runtime (figure 1) handles inter core com-
Epiphany core IDs.
munications where a target post-box, reserving memory for
data from every other core, is allocated per core and is the 1 from parallel import ishost , isdevice ,
coreid
256 byte communications area of figure 2. Messages are sent
2
by writing to a specific post-box location in the target core’s
3 if ishost () :
memory and then awaiting acknowledgement, messages are 4 print ”Core number ”+str(coreid ())+” is a
received by waiting on this local memory area. The actual virtual core on the CPU”
datatransferisperformedviatheDMAengineofanEpiphany 5 elif isdevice () :
6 print ”Core number ”+str(coreid ())+” is a
core and in addition to the message itself an additional byte
physical Epiphany core”
(that wraps around) is also associated to provide versioning
informationwhichiscrucialfordataconsistency.Theruntime Listing4. Pythonvirtualcoresexample,whichillustrateshandlingboth
physical(Epiphany)coresandvirtual(threadedCPU)cores
also provides IO functionality, the Epiphany itself can not
directly perform IO but instead there is a monitor running Listing 4 illustrates Python code for determining which
inside a thread on the host. The monitor will wait on an cores are physical Epiphany and which are virtual cores via
area of shared memory for commands and data, such as theishostandisdevicefunctionswhicharepartoftheparallel
displaying a message, and can write data back (for instance module. For instance if run with all 16 Epiphany cores and
from user input) into shared memory that the Epiphany core 16 virtual cores, then cores 0 to 15 are reported as physical
will pick up. This monitor approach not only provides the Epiphany cores and cores 16 to 31 virtual CPU cores. If run
illusion of IO directly from the Epiphany cores, but it is also with 5 Epiphany cores and 10 virtual cores, then cores 0 to 4
possibletorequestthemonitortoperformfunctionalitysuchas are reported as physical Epiphany cores and 5 to 14 as virtual
string concatenation, complex mathematical functionality and CPU cores.
handling error messages. This reduces the memory footprint The first reason for virtual cores is to allow users to
oneachEpiphanycoreascodetosupportthesemorecomplex experiment with writing parallel Python codes for more than
functions is only required on the host. 16 cores, there are later generations of the Epiphany chip
5
with more cores planned so for educational purposes it is
desirable that programmers can experiment with developing 1 from parallel import *
2 from math import pow, sqrt
and running their code on more cores which virtual cores
3
transparently supports. The other reason for virtual cores is to 4 DATA SIZE=1000
support writing heterogeneous, hybrid parallel codes, where 5 MAX ITS=10000
theEpiphanyactsasanacceleratorandthehostCPUoffloads 6 W=1.3 # Overrelaxing factor (between 1 and
2)
computationally intensive aspects of a code to this device
7
which then sends the results back. A common use case would
8 def fillInitialConditions (local data ,
betorunwithanumberofEpiphanycoresandonevirtualcore local size):
on the host CPU and, using the ishost and isdevice functions, 9 if coreid ()==0: local data[0]=1.0
diverge depending whether it is the Epiphany or CPU. 10 if coreid ()==numcores() −1: local data[
local size+1]=10.0
11
C. Parallel Gauss-Seidel example
12 def computeNorm(local data , local size ,
WhilstthemainpurposesofePythonareeducationandfast bnorm=none):
prototyping,performanceisakeyconsiderationofparallelism 13 tmpnorm=0.0
and as such it is worth addressing the sort of performance 14 i=1
15 while i<=local size :
that the Python programmer might expect from their code
16 tmpnorm=tmpnorm+pow(( local data[i]*2−
withePython.TheinterpretednatureofePythonwillinevitably
local data[i−1]−local data[i+1]) ,
result in a significant overhead compared to a similar C code 2)
runningontheEpiphany,butthePythoncodewillbefareasier 17 i+=1
and quicker to develop and experiment with. Thus there is a 18 tmpnorm=reduce(tmpnorm, ”sum”)
19 if bnorm is none:
trade-off between programmability and performance.
20 return sqrt(tmpnorm)
Listing 5 illustrates a parallel code to solve Laplace’s equa-
21 else:
tion for diffusion in one dimension. This uses the successive 22 return sqrt(tmpnorm)/bnorm
over relaxation (SOR) variant of the Gauss Seidel iterative 23
method for solving systems of linear equations. Lines 8 to 10 24 # Work out the amount of local data
25 local size=DATA SIZE/numcores()
define the function fillInitialConditions which sets the initial,
26 if local size * numcores() != DATA SIZE:
boundary, conditions. Lines 12 to 22 compute the residual
27 if (coreid () < DATA SIZE−local size*
norm of the local data and then issue a reduction (line 18) numcores()): local size=local size+1
to determine the global norm. If the initial norm (bnorm) is 28
provided as an argument to this function then the returned 29 data=[0]*(local size+2)
30
value is relative to this bnorm (which we want for each
31 # Set the initial conditions
iteration), otherwise the absolute residual norm is returned
32 fillInitialConditions (data , local size)
(whichwewantinitially.)Lines25to27calculatetheamount 33
of local data per core and define the local list, data to hold 34 # Compute the initial absolute residual
this(whichisallocatedintheheapmemoryandcontainsextra 35 bnorm=computeNorm(data , local size)
36 norm=1.0
halo elements at the start and end.) At line 38 the loop for
37 its=0
the iterations begins, for each iteration halo swapping (line
38 while norm >= 1e−3 and its < MAX ITS:
40 and 41) to left and right neighbours (where appropriate) is 39 # Halo swap
performedviathesendrecvcommunicationcallandthen,after 40 if (coreid () > 0): data[0]=sendrecv(data
calling the function to calculate the current relative residual, [1], coreid () −1)
41 if (coreid () < numcores() −1): data[
lines47to49containtheSORGauss-Seidelkernel.Whenthe
local size+1]=sendrecv(data[
code completes the final residual and number of iterations is
local size ], coreid ()+1)
displayed by Epiphany core 0 (line 52.) 42
It can be seen from listing 5 that this is a high level code, 43 # Calculate current residual
theprogrammercanclearlyseethecomputationalmethodand 44 norm=computeNorm(data , local size , bnorm)
45
geometric decomposition adopted for parallelism. They are
46 i=1
working with familiar HPC concepts, such as halo swapping
47 while i<=local size :
anddatadistributionwithouthavingtoworryaboutanyofthe 48 data[i]=((1−W) * data[i ]) + 0.5 * W * (
lower level concerns that users of the Epiphany coprocessor data[i−1]+data[i+1])
with other programming technologies would need to address. 49 i+=1
50 its+=1
It becomes very simple to experiment with computational and
51
parallelism choices, such as the number of Epiphany cores
52 if coreid ()==0: print ”Completed in ”+str(
to use, data decomposition, the global data size and over its )+” iterations , RNorm=”+str(norm)
relaxation factor (line 6.) The lower level nature of other
Listing5. PythonGaussSeidelwithSORsolvingLaplace’s
Epiphany programming technologies would often necessitate
equationfordiffusion
wide spread, significant, changes to the code when experi-
menting with these factors. For comparison a version of this has been written in C,
6
using Adapteva’s own Epiphany API, compiled with GCC at
optimisation level 3. At 266 lines this C code is far more
verboseandmuchofthisistakenupwithlowerlevelconcerns
such as data padding and transfer consistency. A performance
evaluationwith1000globalelements,arelaxationfactorof1.3
and solving to a relative residual of 1e-3, has been performed
with these versions and the results of this are illustrated in
table I. The first table entry is running with ePython on all
16 Epiphany cores using default settings (all byte code and
data in core memory.) The second entry in the table is still
runningon16Epiphanycoresbutthebytecodeanddatahave
been located in shared memory rather than local Epiphany
core memory (the ePython interpreter and runtime are still in
Epiphany core memory.) Each core having to rely on shared
memory for its byte code and data increases the runtime by
5 times and illustrates how significant an impact using the
slow main memory is for performance. The third entry in the
table illustrates ePython running as a virtual core on the host
Fig. 3. Strong scaling Python runtime and parallel efficiency with varying
CPU only and when compared against the fourth entry, the Epiphanycores
commonCPythonimplementationonthehostCPU,itisclear
that there is a significant overhead in the ePython interpreter
compared to CPython. Even though there is this overhead, using ePython one of the requests amongst more advanced
the serial CPython on the host is slower than ePython on 16 users has been to support full Python on the host running a
Epiphany cores. It can be seen that the versions in C, both common interpreter such as CPython. This allows for a rich
running in serial on the CPU and in parallel on the Epiphany Python code to be developed and then for specific aspects
vastly outperform CPython and ePython. This is unsurprising, to be offloaded to the Epiphany and also to support existing
especially that the Epiphany C version is far faster than the Python codes where the programmer can experiment with
ePython version, but this had to be hand crafted and took offloading different aspects to the Epiphany. An extension
considerably longer to develop than the ePython code. has therefore been written, where ePython code runs on the
Epiphany cores and full Python on the host CPU and the
TABLEI two can communicate. This is intended to help explore and
RUNTIMEFORDIFFERENTVERSIONSANDCONFIGURATIONSOFGAUSS prototype the offload model in more detail, where complex
SEIDELSORSOLVER
Python codes can offload aspects of their computation fairly
Runtime(s) easily using ePython.
9.61 ePythonon16Epiphanycores Twocodesarewritten,aPythoncodetorunontheEpiphany
52.04 ePythonallinsharedmemory
and second code to run on the host CPU. The host Python
48.56 ePythononhostCPUonly
14.71 CPythononhostCPUonly code imports the epython module which provides all the
2.23 ConARMCPUonly communicationcalls(e.g.send,recvandreduce)astheywould
1.01 Con16Epiphanycores
appear in Python code on the Epiphany and these can be
used to communicate with the code running on the Epiphany.
Figure 3 illustrates the runtime and parallel efficiency of
The Python code running on the host is assigned a core
the Python code running over different numbers of Epiphany
ID one greater than the last Epiphany core ID. The epython
cores. As one would expect as the number of Epiphany cores
executable is then run with the code and also the fullpython
isincreasedtheruntimedropsandaswereachlargernumbers
flag, the host Python code is run as normal with which ever
of cores then we start to experience the limits of strong
Python interpreter the user prefers. Listing 6 illustrates the
scaling,wheretheadditionalcostofcommunicationoutweighs
Python CPU code, generating random numbers and storing
the saving in computation. It was seen in table I that the
these in the data list which is then sent (along with its
performance of ePython is poor in comparison to C, but from
length) to Epiphany core 0. The host Python code then blocks
figure 3 we can see that this is in the computational side of
on the recv call where it will receive the resulting sorted
things as the code scales quite well based upon the parallel
numbersbackfromEpiphanycore0andthendisplaythem.A
efficiency, even as the limits of strong scaling start to apply.
sketch of the Epiphany Python code is provided in listing 7,
This illustrates that there is potential for performance and
where core 0 receives the length of data and data itself from
scaling with ePython but there is work to be done optimising
the Python virtual core (id 16), all Epiphany cores call the
the execution speed.
parallel odd even sort where core 0 will distribute the data
amongst the other cores and these will sort it in parallel. Core
IV. PYTHONINTEROPERABILITY
0 then sends the sorted numbers back to the host at line 10.
As mentioned in section III ePython supports a subset The parallel odd even sort function is based upon one of the
of Python, as the community have picked up and started example Python codes at [12].
7
to a parallel machine that they can play around with and nor
1 from random import randint
do they have the in-depth programming experience to be able
2 from epython import send , recv
to write parallel codes in more traditional approaches such as
3
4 data=[] C+MPI. By abstracting the user from the lower level details
5 count=0 theycanconcentrateonthehigherlevelconcernsoftheircode
6 while count < 5000: both from a computation and parallel point of view. ePython
7 data.append(randint(0,1000))
providesalimitednumberofparallelmessagepassingcallsin
8 count+=1
comparison with a technology such as MPI, but as we have
9
10 send(len(data) , 0) seenthesearesufficientforalargenumberofcodesandteach
11 send(data , 0, len(data)) the underlying concepts.
12 data=recv(0, len(data))
Python codes illustrating a variety of different parallel
13
14 count=0 patterns such as the geometric decomposition of our Gauss-
15 while count < 5000: Seidel example, pipeline, master worker and parallel divide
16 print data[count] and conquer have been developed and are available in the
17 count+=1
ePython repository as examples. Additionally a series of blog
Listing6. PythonhostCPUcodeforoffloadingparallelnumbersorting articleshavebeenpublishedontheParallellawebsite,initially
aimedatempoweringnovicestowriteasimpleparallelcodein
1 from parallel import coreid , recv , send lessthan1minutethesehavethenlookedataspectsofparallel
2 messaginganddifferentapproachesforparallelisingproblems.
3 data=[] CommonHPCcomputationalcodesarealsointroducedbothin
4 datalen=0
the blog articles and ePython examples. Through all of these
5 if coreid==0:
there are some very interesting behaviours exhibited which
6 datalen=recv(16)
7 data=recv(16, datalen) people can experiment with, we have seen one example of
8 parallel odd even sort(data) this in section III-C where the limits of strong scaling mean
9 if coreid==0: that as a greater number of cores is used then there is a law
10 send(data , 16, len(data))
of diminishing returns. With smaller global data sizes people
Listing7. SketchofPythoncoderunningonEpiphanycoresfor can actually see an optimum number of Epiphany cores and
parallelnumbersorting thenadecreaseinperformancewhentheygopastthis,alldue
to strong scaling.
Table II illustrates the runtime of ePython on the Epiphany
and CPython on the host sorting 5000 numbers via the odd The community have contributed a number of examples
even sort method. The first entry illustrates the hybrid code such as Mandlebrot, a Monte Carlo method (dartboard to
on 16 Epiphany cores and the host CPU (running CPython) generate PI) and sorting algorithms. There are other tools,
compared to the second entry which is the runtime of a serial suchastheJupyterNotebook[13]whichcommunitymembers
version in CPython on the host only. Unlike the Gauss-Seidel have integrated with ePython for interactive programming of
example,itcanbeseenherethatusingserialCPythonforsort- examples to aid education in parallelism. Very many of the
ingthenumbersisslightlyfasterthansortingontheEpiphany ideas and concepts that people play with in Python on the
cores via the hybrid offload approach of ePython+CPython. Epiphany can then be scaled up and apply to writing parallel
There are a number of reasons for this, firstly CPython is far codes for large scale supercomputers.
more mature and will contain optimisations which ePython
TheParallellaisnottheonlytechnologythatsupportsHPC
does not yet implement. Secondly shared memory between
education, for instance for a comparable price it is possible to
the host and Epiphany is slow (as discussed in section III-C)
purchase a number of Raspberry PIs and this has been done
anddatamustnegotiatethisinthehybridcasetocommunicate
in Wee Archie [14] which is made up of 18 Raspberry PIs.
withtheEpiphanycores.Additionallythehybridcoderequires
Howeverinthisapproachonenotonlyneedstobuytheboards
core 0 to distribute its received data amongst the other cores
but also to purchase all the supporting hardware such as the
andthengatherthisbackupafterwardsbeforesendingitback
network switches and cables. They also need the expertise
to the host and this adds extra overhead.
and time to set both the hardware and software environment
up so that these can communicate before being able to write
TABLEII
or experiment with any parallel code. Networking on the
RUNTIMECOMPARISONFORNUMBERSORT
Raspberry PI is implemented on top of USB and driven in
Runtime(s) software, therefore it is notoriously slow and as such running
43.83 HybridePythonandCPython
codes over multiple nodes often results in worse performance
37.59 CPythononhostonly
than a single node. With the Parallella and ePython there
is no additional setup or building costs and the Epiphany
inter-core eMesh connection technology is such that inter-
V. ASANEDUCATIONALTOOL
core communications will perform much better and closer or
The main driving force behind the development of ePython even better to what one would expect from large scale HPC
is using it as an educational tool. Not everyone has access machines.
8
VI. CONCLUSIONS [2] Adapteva. (2013) Parallella-1.x reference manual. [Online]. Available:
http://www.parallella.org/docs/parallella manual.pdf
In this paper we have introduced ePython, an implemen-
[3] ——. (2013) Epiphany architecture reference. [Online]. Available:
tation of a subset of Python for the Epiphany co-processor. http://www.adapteva.com/docs/epiphany arch ref.pdf
WhilstarchitecturessuchastheEpiphanyhavegreatpotential, [4] A. Olofsson. (2016) Epiphany-v: A 1024 processor 64-bit risc
system-on-chip. [Online]. Available: https://www.parallella.org/wp-
both from an educational (due to low cost) and future HPC
content/uploads/2016/10/e5 1024core soc.pdf
(due to very low power) perspective these chips are very [5] D. Richie. (2013) Coprthr api reference. [Online]. Available:
difficult to program for a variety of reasons. Due to the www.browndeertechnology.com/docs/coprthr api ref.pdf
[6] J. A. Ross, D. A. Richie, S. J. Park, and D. R. Shires, “Parallel
high level nature of Python, our approach allows users to
programming model for the epiphany many-core coprocessor using
quickly develop parallel codes and experiment with a variety threadedmpi,”MicroprocessorsandMicrosystems,vol.43,pp.95–103,
ofdifferentconsiderationsandapproaches.Combinedwiththe 2016.
[7] J.A.RossandD.A.Richie,“Implementingopenshmemfortheadapteva
low cost nature of the Parallella, ePython could become a key
epiphanyriscarrayprocessor,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1604.04205,2016.
enabler for making supercomputing accessible to all. There [8] Adapteva.(2013)E16g301epiphany16-coremicroprocessor.[Online].
is also benefit from a prototyping point of view, it is true Available:http://www.adapteva.com/docs/e16g301 datasheet.pdf
[9] P.S.Foundation.(2016)Pythonlanguagereference.[Online].Available:
that eventually one would want to port their code to C for
http://www.python.org
performance reasons but initially they can very easily and [10] Numba. (2016) Numba documentation. [Online]. Available:
quickly develop and experiment using Python that can then http://numba.pydata.org/numba-doc/latest/index.html
[11] R. d. Wargny, “High performance python on intel many-core architec-
inform and drive the porting into C later on. The central ideas
ture,”inEuroPython,2016.
behind ePython are not unique to the Epiphany, our work can [12] N. Brown. (2016) epython parallel odd even sort. [Online]. Avail-
beappliedtootherhighcorecount,lowmemoryarchitectures able:https://github.com/mesham/epython/blob/master/examples/parallel-
odd-even-sort.py
and Python could act as an approach for quickly testing and
[13] F.Pe´rezandB.E.Granger,“IPython:asystemforinteractivescientific
evaluating further developments in this area in the future. computing,” Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
There is plenty of further work for ePython especially 21–29,May2007.[Online].Available:http://ipython.org
[14] U. of Edinburgh. (2016) Wee archie: Digital dinos put
because the 1024 core Epiphany V, which will be available
bite-sized supercomputer through its paces. [Online]. Avail-
in early 2017, will likely attract a lot of interest and new able: https://www.epcc.ed.ac.uk/news/digital-dinosaurs-put-bite-sized-
users to the technology. Being able to quickly get started supercomputer-through-its-paces
and write high level parallel code in Python will be a major
advantage and an obvious first step will be to further optimise
the interpreter. By using techniques such as JIT compiling
and static optimisation it should be possible to significantly
increase the performance of ePython, to make it more com-
petitive with other Python interpreters and much closer to
C on these architectures. Another obvious extension is on
the parallel side of things, non-blocking messages would be
useful and also support for shared memory communication
would be beneficial and support education in writing shared
memory parallel codes. When combining ePython on the
Epiphany with a full Python interpreter, such as CPython,
on the host it is not ideal to require two separate codes
nor communicate via the message passing function calls.
Instead further abstraction, where ePython code is contained
as functions in the host code (probably decorated with some
annotation) and the programmer could interact with this RPC
style,bycallingthesefunctionsonthehost,andtheunderlying
epython module would handle all the communications to and
from the Epiphany transparently.
These further developments to ePython combined with
Adapteva’a future roadmap for the Epiphany architecture will
provide a strong foundation for prototyping and experiment-
ing with parallelism and parallel algorithms in Python over
thousands of low power cores.
ePython is open source, licenced under BSD and available
for download at
https://github.com/mesham/epython
REFERENCES
[1] A. Olofsson, “A manycore coprocessor architecture for heterogeneous
computing,” in Los Alamos Computer Science Symposium (LACSS)
2009,2009.
