From Statistical Relational to Neurosymbolic
Artificial Intelligence: a Survey.
Giuseppe Marraa, Sebastijan Dumančićc, Robin Manhaevea, Luc De Raedta,b
aKU Leuven, Department of Computer Science and Leuven.AI
bÖrebro University, Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems
cDelft University of Technology, Department of Software Technology
Abstract
Thissurveyexplorestheintegrationoflearningandreasoningintwodifferent
fields of artificial intelligence: neurosymbolic and statistical relational artificial
intelligence. Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence (NeSy) studies the integration
of symbolic reasoning and neural networks, while statistical relational artificial
intelligence (StarAI) focuses on integrating logic with probabilistic graphical
models. This survey identifies seven shared dimensions between these two
subfields of AI. These dimensions can be used to characterize different NeSy and
StarAI systems. They are concerned with (1) the approach to logical inference,
whether model or proof-based; (2) the syntax of the used logical theories; (3) the
logicalsemanticsofthesystemsandtheirextensionstofacilitatelearning;(4)the
scope of learning, encompassing either parameter or structure learning; (5) the
presence of symbolic and subsymbolic representations; (6) the degree to which
systems capture the original logic, probabilistic, and neural paradigms; and (7)
the classes of learning tasks the systems are applied to. By positioning various
NeSy and StarAI systems along these dimensions and pointing out similarities
and differences between them, this survey contributes fundamental concepts for
understanding the integration of learning and reasoning.
1. Introduction
The integration of learning and reasoning is a key challenge in artificial
intelligence and machine learning today. Various communities are addressing it,
especiallythefieldofneurosymbolicartificialintelligence(NeSy)[12,28]. NeSy’s
goal is to integrate symbolic reasoning with neural networks. NeSy already has a
long tradition, and it has recently attracted a lot of attention. Indeed, the topic
has been addressed by prominent researchers such as Y. Bengio and H. Kautz in
their keynotes at AAAI 2020, by Y. Bengia and G. Marcus in the AI Debate
Email addresses: giuseppe.marra@kuleuven.be(GiuseppeMarra),s.dumancic@tudelft.nl
(SebastijanDumančić),robin.manhaeve@kuleuven.be(RobinManhaeve),
luc.deraedt@kuleuven.be(LucDeRaedt)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier January 3, 2024
4202
naJ
2
]IA.sc[
4v15411.8012:viXra
[10] and Hochreiter has recently stated [56] that NeSy is “the most promising
approach to a broad AI”.
Another domain with a rich tradition in integrating learning and reasoning is
that of statistical relational learning and artificial intelligence (StarAI) [44, 96].
StarAI focuses on integrating logical and probabilistic reasoning.
Historically, these two endeavours have adopted different learning paradigms,
probabilistic versus neural, for integrating logic into machine learning. This
in turn has resulted in two different subcommunities. StarAI has focused on
probabilistic logics, their semantics and making inference more tractable, while
learning is usually based on parameter learning techniques from probabilistic
graphical models. On the other hand, NeSy extends neural networks with sym-
bolic knowledge, focusing on scalable approximate models, paying less attention
to semantical issues. In particular, NeSy techniques can often be characterized
byaclearparameterizationintermsofneuralnetworks,i.e. layeredstructuresof
latent representations, and by resorting to the gradient-based backpropagation
paradigm for learning. Despite a different focus and approach, the two domains
want to achieve the same goal, that is, to integrate learning and reasoning. It is
therefore surprising that there has been relatively little interaction between the
two domains, but see [27, 11].
Thisdiscrepancyisthekeymotivationbehindthissurvey: itaimsatpointing
out the similarities between these two endeavours and, in this way, it wants to
stimulate cross-fertilization. We start from the literature on StarAI, following
the key concepts, definitions and techniques outlined in several textbooks and
tutorialssuchas[104,96],becauseitturnsoutthatthesameissuesandtechniques
that arise in StarAI apply to NeSy as well.
The key contributions of this paper are:
1. We identify seven dimensions that these fields have in common and that
can be used to categorize both StarAI and NeSy approaches. These seven
dimensionsareconcernedwith(1)modelvsproof-basedinference,(2)logic
syntax,(3)semantics,(4)learningparametersorstructure,(5)representing
entities as symbols or subsymbols, (6) integrating logic with probabilistic
and/or neural concepts, and (7) learning tasks.
2. WeprovideevidenceforourclaimbypositioningawiderangeofStarAIand
NeSy systems along these dimensions and pointing out analogies between
them. This provides not only new insights into the relationships between
StarAI and NeSy, but it also allows one to carry over and adapt techniques
from one field to another. These insights provide opportunities for cross-
fertilization between StarAI and NeSy, by focusing on those dimensions
that have not been fully exploited yet.
3. We gently introduce key logical concepts and techniques inherited from
StarAI. In this way, the paper also provides a gentle introduction to
symbolic AI and StarAI techniques for the interested “connectionist” prac-
titioner.
4. We illustrate each dimension using existing methods, and in this way, also
present an intuitive and concrete overview of the research field.
2
Unlike some other perspectives on neurosymbolic computation [12, 28, 16],
the present survey limits itself to a logical perspective and to developments in
neurosymbolic computation that are consistent with this perspective. Therefore,
we usually refer to symbols and symbolic algorithms as synonyms for logical
representations and logical reasoning. Furthermore, the survey focuses on
representative and prototypical systems rather than aiming at completeness
(which would not be possible given the fast developments in the field). Several
other surveys about neurosymbolic AI have been proposed. An early overview
of neurosymbolic computation is that of [4]. Unlike the present survey it focuses
very much on a logical and a reasoning perspective. Today, the focus has shifted
very much to learning. More recently, [67] analysed the intersection between
NeSy and graph neural networks (GNN). [123] described neurosymbolic systems
in terms of the composition of blocks described by few patterns, concerning
processes and exchanged data. In contrast, this survey is more focused on the
underlying principles that govern such a composition. Finally, [26] exploits a
neural network viewpoint by investigating in which components (i.e. input, loss
or structure) symbolic knowledge is injected.
Structure of the paper. The next seven sections each describe one dimension by
first introducing the main underlying concepts, either based on logic, probability
or machine learning, and then showing how they are incorporated in StarAI and
NeSy systems. Section 2 presents how to use logic for inference by distinguishing
between proof-based and model-based systems, while Section 3 introduces logic
at the syntac level, in particular, propositional, relational and first-order logic.
Section 4 then introduces the semantics of logic and shows how to extend it to a
continuous semantics, using fuzzy and probabilistic logics. Section 5 discusses
the dimension of learning, distinguishing parameter learning from structure
learning. Section 6 focuses on the representational level and to what extent
neurosymbolic models use symbolic and/or subsymbolic features. Section 7
positionsneurosymbolicapproachesalongthespectrumofthreemainparadigms,
i.e. logic, probability and neural networks. Section 8 describes general classes of
learning tasks to which neurosymbolic systems are usually applied. Finally, in
Section 10, we conclude by introducing open challenges in the neurosymbolic
landscape.
We summarize various neurosymbolic approaches along these dimensions in
Table 1.
3
sksaT
smgidaraP
snoitatneserpeR
gninraeL
scitnameS
xatnyS
ecnerefnI
skrowemarF
noisivrepu)S(
tnatsi)D(
lamini)M(
desivrepu)S(
ime)S(
)l/L(
cigoL
elbat)S(
lanoitisopor)P(
cilobmy)S(
sretemara)P(
foor)P(
noitelpmo)CGK(
)p/P(
ytilibaborP
lacissal)C(
lanoitale)R(
cilobmys)buS(
erutcurt)S(
ledo)M(
evitarene)G(
)n/N(larueN
yzzu)F(
)LOF(
noitcudn)I(
egdelwon)K(
ytilibabor)P(
IK
nL
S
S
+
P
P
+
S
LOF
M+P
]111[
PLIα
IK
+
SD
nL
S
S
+
P
F
+
M
R
P
]93[
PLI∂
IK
+
SD
NpL
buS+S
S+P
P
+
M
LOF
M+P
]27[
goLborPpeeD
SS
+
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
M
LOF
P
]231[goLhcotSpeeD
IK
nL
S
S+P
F
+
M
R
P
]211[goLffiD
SS
+
SD
Nl
buS+S
P
F
+
C
P
M
]04[2LD
CGK
+
SS
NPl
S
P
P
+
F
+
C
LOF
M
]77[MLD
IK
+
CGK
NL
buS
+
S
S
+
P
F
+
M
R
P
]611[NNRL
SS
+
SD
Nl
buS
+
S
P
F
+
C
LOF
M
]5[NTL
IK
+
CGK
nL
S
P
F
+
M
R
P
]731[PLlarueN
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
S
LOF
M+P
]831[PSArueN
IK
+
CGK
nL
S
S
+
P
F
+
M
R
P
]53[MLN
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
M
R
P
]121[goLN
IK
+
CGK
NpL
buS
+
S
S
+
P
P
+
M
R
P
]131[golorPLN
G
+
CGK
NPl
buS
+
S
S
+
P
P
+
C
LOF
M
]87[NLMN
IK
+
CGK
nL
buS
+
S
S
+
P
F
+
M
R
P
]201[PTN
SS
NPl
S
P
P
+
C
LOF
M
]67[MNR
SS
+
SD
Nl
buS+S
P
F
+
C
LOF
M
]33[RBS
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
M
LOF
P
]85[pollacS
SS
NpL
S
P
P
+
C
P
M
]331[LS
SS+
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
S
LOF
M+P
]311[hsalS
CGK
+
SD
NpL
S
P
P
+
M
R
P
]81[goLrosneT
.repapehtnideniltuosnoisnemid6ehtotgnidroccaskrowemarfySeNdesab-cigoL
:1elbaT
4
2. Proof- vs Model-theoretic View of Logic
In this paper, we focus on clausal logic as it is a standard form to which
any first order logical formula can be converted. In clausal logic, theories are
represented in terms of clauses. More formally, a clause is an expression of the
form h ∨...∨h ←b ∧...∧b . The h are head literals or conclusions, while
1 k 1 n k
the b are body literals or conditions. Clauses with no conditions (n = 0) and
i
one conclusion (k =1) are facts. Clauses with only one conclusion (k =1) are
definite clauses.
The question we want to answer in this section is how to use such clausal
theories to reason? And, how to infer new facts from the known clauses? Along
this first dimension, we will investigate the two fundamental ways to view logical
inference and determine the implications for StarAI and NeSy systems. In one
view,wewanttofindproofs foracertainquery,whichleadstotheproof-theoretic
approach to logic. In the other view, we want to find models (that is, truth
assignments to the logical atoms) that satisfy a given theory. This leads to the
model-theoretic approach to logic.
Proof-theoretic logic. The proof-theoretic approach finds proofs for a query in a
logic theory. While this approach to inference is applicable to any logic theory,
we focus on logic programs in this paper. Syntactically, a logic program is a
definite clause theory, which is a theory where all the clauses are definite (i.e.
onlyoneconclusion). Inlogicprograms,definiteclausesareinterpretedasif-then
rules (h is true if b ,...,b are true).
1 n
Aproofforaqueryqisasequenceoflogicalinferencestepsthatdemonstrates
thetruth of aquerybasedon thegiven program. Acompact wayofrepresenting
the set of all proofs in a logic program uses an AND/OR tree, which consists of
AND and OR nodes and edges amongst them. Each node represents a goal. An
AND node branches into one or more outgoing edges, each representing one of
the sub-goals that need to be simultaneously satisfied for the goal in the AND
nodetobetrue. AnORnoderepresentschoicesoralternativesbetweenmultiple
clauses that can be used to prove a particular sub-goal. The OR node branches
into multiple outgoing edges, each representing one of these possible choices.
Leaf nodes in the AND/OR tree represent true facts. Typically, forward or
backwardchaininginferenceisusedtosearchforproofsforqueries. Weillustrate
this in Example 1.
Example 1: Logic programs and proofs
Consider the following logic program (adapted from [91]):
burglary.
hears_alarm_mary.
earthquake.
hears_alarm_john.
5
alarm <- earthquake.
alarm <- burglary.
calls_mary <- alarm,hears_alarm_mary.
calls_john <- alarm,hears_alarm_john.
The rules for alarm state that there will be an alarm if there is a burglary or
an earthquake.
The set of proofs for the query calls_mary can be represented compactly as
an AND/OR tree.
(calls_mary) AND
(alarm) OR hears_alarm_mary
burglary earthquake
Model-theoretic logic. On the other hand, the model theoretic perspective on
logic is to find a model or truth assignment to the logical atoms that satisfy a
given logic theory. An interpretation, or possible world, is a truth-assignment
to the propositions (or ground atoms) of the language, and can be uniquely
identified with the set of propositions it assigns True (thus considering all the
other False). An interpretation is a model of a clause h ∨...∨h ←b ∧...∧b
1 k 1 n
if at least one of the h is in the interpretation when all the b ∧...∧b are in
i 1 n
the interpretation as well. An interpretation I is a model of a theory T, and
we write I |= T, if it is a model of all clauses in the theory. We say that the
theoryissatisfiable ifithasamodel. Thesatisfiabilityproblem, thatis, deciding
whether a theory has a model, is one of the most fundamental ones in computer
science (cf. the SAT problem for propositional logic).
Example 2: Model-theoretic
Consider the following theory (adopted from [100]):
smokes_mary ← smokes_john, influences_john_mary.
smokes_john ← smokes_mary, influences_mary_john.
smokes_mary ← stress_mary.
smokes_john ← stress_john.
A model of the previous theory is the set:
M ={stress_john,smokes_john}
By considering all the elements of this set True and all others False, the four
clauses are satisfied.
6
In the model-theoretic perspective, one uses the logic theory as a set of
constraints on the propositions, that is, the propositions are related to one
another, without imposing a directed inference relationship between them as in
forward or backward chaining. More details on these connections can be found
in [96, 41].
2.1. Implications for StarAI
Statistical Relational AI’s focus is on unifying logical and probabilistic graph-
icalmodels(PGMs). APGM[66]isagraphicalmodelthatcompactlyrepresents
a (joint) probability distribution P(X ,...,X ) over n discrete or continuous
1 n
random variables X ,...,X . The key idea is that the joint factorizes over some
1 n
factors f specified over subsets Xi of the variables {X ,...,X }.
i 1 n
1
P(X ,...,X )= f (X1)×...×f (Xk)
1 n Z 1 k
The random variables correspond to the nodes in the graphical structure, and
the factorization is determined by the edges in the graph.
Therearetwoclassesofgraphicalmodels: directed ones,orBayesiannetworks,
and undirected ones, or Markov Networks. In Bayesian networks, the underlying
graph structure is a directed acyclic graph, and the factors fi(X |parents(X ))
i i
correspondtotheconditionalprobabilitiesP(X |parents(X )),whereparents(X )
i i i
denotes the set of random variables that are a parent of X in the graph. In
i
Markov networks, the graph is undirected and the factors fi(Xi) correspond to
the set of nodes Xi that form (maximal) cliques in the graph. Furthermore, the
factors are non-negative and Z is a normalisation constant.
The distinction between directed and undirected graphical models is parallel
to the proof- vs model-theoretic view of logic. This parallel is at the very
core of StarAI. In fact, by viewing each variable X (or proposition) at the
i
same time as a random and as a logical variable [105], clausal theories can be
extended to define probabilistic models. Clauses can then be translated into
binary valued factors by labeling them with weights (or probabilities), thus
parameterizing the corresponding factors.
In the remainder of this section, we will show how StarAI has used this
parallel to define two types of systems [96].
The first type of StarAI system generalizes directed models and resembles
Bayesiannetworks. Itincludeswell-knownrepresentationssuchasplatenotation
[66], probabilistic relational models (PRMs) [43], probabilistic logic programs
(PLPs) [97], and Bayesian logic programs (BLPs) [61]. Today the most typical
andpopularrepresentativesofthiscategoryaretheprobabilistic(logic)programs.
Probabilistic logic programs were introduced by Poole [92] and the first
learningalgorithmisduetoSato[105]. Probabilisticlogicprogramsareessentially
definite clause programs where every fact is annotated with the probability
that it is True. This then results in a possible world semantics. The reason
why probabilistic logic programs are viewed as directed models is clear when
7
burglary earthquake
hears_alarm_john alarm hears_alarm_mary
calls_john calls_mary
Figure1: TheBayesiannetworkcorrespondingtotheProbLogprograminExample3
looking at the derivations for a query, cf. Example 1. At the top of the
AND-OR tree, there is the query that one wants to prove and the structure
of the tree is that of a directed graph (even though it need not be acyclic).
One can straightforwardly map directed graphical models, that is, Bayesian
networks, onto such probabilistic logic programs by associating one definite
clause to every entry in the conditional probability tables, yielding factors
of the form P(X|Y ,...,Y ). Assuming boolean random variables, each entry
1 n
x,y ,...,y with parameter value v can be represented using the definite clause
1 n
X(x)←Y (y )∧...∧Y (y )∧p and probabilistic fact v ::p . A
1 1 n n x,y1,...,yn x,y1,...,yn
probabilistic version of Example 1 is shown in Example 3 using the syntax of
ProbLog [31].
Example 3: ProbLog
We show a probabilistic extension of the alarm program using ProbLog.
0.1::burglary.
0.3::hears_alarm_mary.
0.05::earthquake.
0.6::hears_alarm_john.
alarm <- earthquake.
alarm <- burglary.
calls_mary <- alarm,hears_alarm_mary.
calls_john <- alarm,hears_alarm_john.
This program can be mapped to the Bayesian network in Figure 1
This probabilistic logic program defines a distribution p over possible worlds
ω. Let P be a Problog program and F = {p :: c ,··· ,p :: c } be the set
1 1 n n
of ground probabilistic facts c of the program and p their corresponding
i i
probabilities. ProbLogdefinesaprobabilitydistributionoverωinthefollowing
way:
8
stress(john) influences(mary,john) stress(mary)
smokes(john) smokes(mary)
influences(john,john) influences(john,mary) influences(mary,mary)
Figure2: TheMarkovFieldcorrespondingtotheMarkovlogicnetworkinExample4
 0, if ω ̸|=P

p(ω)= (cid:89) p · (cid:89) (1−p ), if ω |=P
i j

ci∈ω:ci=T cj∈ω:cj=F
The second type of StarAI system generalizes undirected graphical models
such as Markov networks or random fields. The prototypical example is Markov
Logic Networks (MLNs) [100], and also Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) [3] follows
this idea.
UndirectedStarAImodelsconsistofasetofweightedclausesw :h ∨...∨h ←
1 k
b ∧...∧b that become soft constraints. The higher the weight of a ground
1 m
clause, the less likely possible worlds that violate these constraints are. In the
limit, when the weight is +∞ the constraint must be satisfied and becomes a
purely logical constraint, a hard constraint. The weighted clauses specify a more
general relationship between the conclusion and the condition than the definite
clauses of directed models. While clauses of undirected models can still be used
in (resolution) theorem provers, they are commonly viewed as constraints that
relate these two sets of atoms.
SuchundirectedStarAImodelscanbemappedtoanundirectedprobabilistic
graphicalmodelinwhichthereisaone-to-onecorrespondencebetweengrounded
weighted clauses and factors, as we show in Example 4.
Example 4: Markov Logic Networks
We show a probabilistic extension (adapted from [100]) of the theory in
Example 2 using the formalism of Markov Logic Networks. We use a First
Order language with domain D ={john,mary} and weighted clauses α and
1
9
α , i.e.:
2
α : 2.0::smokes(Y)←smokes(X),influences(X,Y)
1
α : 0.5::smokes(X)←stress(X)
2
In Figure 2, we show the corresponding Markov field.
A Markov Logic Network defines a probability distribution over possible
worlds as follows. Let A = [α ,··· ,α ] be a set of logical clauses and let
1 n
B = [β ,··· ,β ] the corresponding positive weights. Let θ be a possible
1 n j
assignment of constants (from the domain D) to the variables (e.g. X,Y) of
the clause α , that is, a substitution. Let α θ the grounded clause where all
i i j
variables in θ have been replaced by their corresponding constants. Finally,
j
let 1(ω,α θ ) be an indicator function, evaluating to 1 if the ground clause is
i i
True in ω, 0 otherwise.
The probabilistic semantics of Markov Logic is the distribution (with Z the
normalization constant):
p(ω)= 1 exp (cid:0)(cid:88) β (cid:88) 1(ω,α θ ) (cid:1)
Z i i j
i j
Intuitively, in MLNs, a world is more probable if it makes many of its ground
instances True. Notice that MLNs are usually defined on first-order clause
theories, with variables and domains. We will further investigate this issue in
Section 3.
2.2. Implications for NeSy
The distinction between proof vs models and inference rules vs constraints,
turns out to be fundamental for neurosymbolic systems as well.
InneurosymbolicAI,weightedclausesarenotusedtoconstructaprobabilistic
graphical model, but they are likewise used to construct neural models. More
specifically, NeSy systems that exploit a proof-theoretic approach use the
proofs to build the architecture of the neural net. On the other side of the
spectrum, NeSy systems that exploit a model-theoretic approach use the
constraints to build a loss function for the neural net.
Both choices are extremely natural. Proof trees capture the structure of
the inference process in a graphical representation. Therefore, they can be
used as the structure of the neural network computation, which corresponds to
their architecture. On the other hand, the desired behaviour of the variables is
expressed in terms of constraints. Loss functions are the de facto standard to
enforce desired behaviours on the output variables of a neural network.
First, we survey proof-based NeSy models, which use theorem proving for
logical inference and proofs to template the neural architecture. In particular,
whenprovingaspecificqueryatom,theykeeptrackofalltheusedrulesinaproof
tree, such as the one shown in Example 1. Weights on facts and rules are then
10
used to label leaves or edges of the tree, respectively, while real valued activation
functionsareusedtolabeltheANDandORnodes. Theresultisacomputational
graph that can be executed (or evaluated) bottom-up, starting from the leaves
up to the root. Generally speaking, the output of the computational graph is
a score for the query atom. Different semantics can be exploited in building
the computational graph, ranging from relaxations of truth values (such as in
fuzzy logic) to probabilities (see Section 4). The connection between the proof
tree and the neural network suggests schemes for learning the parameters of
these models. Indeed, the obtained computational graph is always differentiable.
Thus, given a set of atoms that are known to be True (resp. False), one can
maximize (resp. minimize) their score using the corresponding computational
graphs. Inference in these models is turned into evaluation of the computational
graph. The direction of the rules indicates the direction of the evaluation, in
the same way as it indicates the direction of inference in logic programming.
Among this category are systems based on Prolog or Datalog, such as TensorLog
[18], Neural Theorem Provers (NTPs) [102], NLProlog [131], DeepProbLog [72],
NLog [121] and DiffLog [112]. Lifted Relational Neural Networks (LRNNs) [116]
and ∂ILP [39] are other examples of non-probabilistic directed models, where
weighted definite clauses are compiled into a neural network architecture in
a forward chaining fashion. The systems that imitate logical reasoning with
tensor calculus, Neural Logic Programming (NeuralLP) [137] and Neural Logic
Machines (NLM) [35], are likewise instances of directed logic. An example of a
proof-based NeSy model is given in Example 5.
Example 5: Knowledge-Based Artificial Neural Networks
Knowledge-Based Artificial Neural Networks (KBANN)[119] is the first
method to use definite clausal logic and theorem proving to template the
architecture of a neural network.
KBANN turns a program into a neural network in several steps:
1. KBANN starts from a definite clause program and a set of queries.
2. The program is turned into an AND-OR tree using the proofs for the
queries.
3. The AND-OR tree is turned into a neural network with a similar
structure. Nodes are divided into layers. The weights and the biases
are set such that evaluating the network returns the same outcome of
querying the program.
4. New hidden units are added. Hidden units play the role of unknown
rules that need to be learned. They are initialized with zero weights;
i.e. they are inactive.
5. New links are added from each layer to the next one, obtaining the final
neural network.
An example of this process is shown in Figure 3. KBANN needs some
restrictions over the kind of rules. In particular, the rules are assumed to
11
calls_mary AND
alarm <- earthquake. alarm OR hears_alarm_mary
alarm <- burglary.
calls_mary <- alarm, burglary earthquake
hears_alarm_mary.
(1) (2)
(3) (4)
(5)
Figure 3: Knowledge-Based Artificial Neural Network. Network creation process. (1) the
initiallogicprogram;(2)theAND-ORtreeforthequerycalls_mary;(3)mappingthetree
intoaneuralnetwork;(4)addinghiddenneurons,(5)addinginterlayerconnections.
be conjunctive, non-recursive, and variable-free (or propositional). Many of
these restrictions are removed by more recent systems.
We now survey the second class of NeSy systems, the model-based ones.
These systems use logic to define a loss function (usually a regularization term)
for neural networks. The networks compute scores for the set of atoms that
correspond to the output neurons. At each training step, the logic-based loss
function determines the degree to which the assigned scores violate the logical
theory and uses this to determine the penalty. Logical inference is turned into a
learning problem (i.e. “learning to satisfy”) and it is usually cast in a variational
optimization scheme.1 As a consequence, in constraint-based models, the neural
network has to solve two tasks at the same time: solving a subsymbolic learning
1Thisisreminiscentofthevariationalapproachtoprobabilisticinferenceinprobabilistic
graphicalmodelsandconstitutesafurtherparallelbetweenthefields.
12
problem (e.g. perception) as well as approximating the logical inference process
[75]. AlargegroupofNeSyapproaches,includingSemanticBasedRegularization
(SBR) [33], Logic Tensor Networks (LTN) [5], Semantic Loss (SL) [133] and DL2
[40], exploits logical knowledge as a soft regularization constraint that favours
solutions that satisfy the logical constraints. SBR and LTN compute atom
(fuzzy) truth assignments as the output of the neural network and translate
the provided logical formulas into a real valued regularization loss term using
fuzzy logic. SL uses marginal probabilities of the target atoms to define the
regularization term and relies on arithmetic circuits [24] to evaluate it efficiently,
as detailed in Example 6. DL2 defines a numerical loss providing no specific
fuzzyorprobabilisticsemantics,whichallowsforincludingnumericalvariablesin
theformulas(e.g. byusingalogicaltermx>1.5). Anothergroupofapproaches,
including Neural Markov Logic Networks (NMLN) [78] and Relational Neural
Machines(RNM)[76]extendMLNs,allowingfactorsofexponentialdistributions
to be implemented as neural architectures. Finally, [103, 32] compute ground
atomsscoresasdotproductsbetweenrelationandentityembeddings;implication
rules are then translated into a logical loss through a continuous relaxation of
the implication operator.
Example 6: Semantic Loss
The Semantic Loss [133] is an example of an undirected model where (proba-
bilistic) logic is exploited as a regularization term in training a neural model.
Let p = [p ,...,p ] be a vector of probabilities for a list of propositional
1 n
variables X = [X ,...,X ]. In particular, p denotes the probability of
1 n i
variable X being True and corresponds to a single output of a neural net
i
having n outputs. Let α be a logic sentence defined over X.
Then, the semantic loss between α and p is:
(cid:88) (cid:89) (cid:89)
Loss(α,p)∝−log p (1−p ).
i i
x|=α i:x|=Xi i:x|=¬Xi
The authors provide the intuition behind this loss:
The semantic loss is proportional to the negative logarithm of the
probability of generating a state that satisfies the constraint when
sampling values according to p.
Suppose you want to solve a multi-class classification task (example adapted
from [133]), where each input example must be assigned to a single class.
Then, one would like to enforce mutual exclusivity among the classes. This
can be easily done on supervised examples, by coupling a softmax activation
layer with a cross entropy loss. However, there is no standard way to impose
this constraint for unlabeled data, which can be useful in a semi-supervised
setting.
The solution provided by the Semantic Loss framework is to encode mutual
13
exclusivity into the propositional constraint β:
β =(X ∧¬X ∧¬X )∨(¬X ∧X ∧¬X )∨(¬X ∧¬X ∧X )
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
Consider a neural network classifier with three outputs p=[p ,p ,p ]. Then,
1 2 3
for each input example (whether labeled or unlabeled), we can build the
semantic loss term:
L(β,p)=p (1−p )(1−p )+(1−p )p (1−p )+(1−p )(1−p )p
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
It can be summed up to the standard cross-entropy term for the labeled
examples.
UnlikefordirectedmethodssuchasKBANN(Example5)andTensorLog,the
logic is turned into a loss-function that is used during training. The function
constrains the underlying probabilities, but there are no directed or causal
relationships among them. Moreover, during inference only the probabilities
p are used while the logic formula β is not used anymore. On the contrary,
in KBANN, the logic is compiled into the architecture of the network and,
therefore, it it is also exploited at evaluation time.
To conclude, let us stress a key difference between the two classes of NeSy
systems w.r.t. the way they incorporate the knowledge expressed in the logical
clauses. Proof-based, directed models use logic to define the architecture of
a neural symbolic network. Thus, logic is part of the inference of the model
and acts as a structural constraint. The designer has full control of where and
how the logic is used inside the network. Thus, logical knowledge can easily
be extended or modified at test-time, without the need to retrain, leading to a
high degree of modularity and out-of-distribution generalization [82]. On the
other hand, when logic is only encoded in an objective function, the neural net
learns to (approximately) satisfy it. Therefore, the knowledge is only latently
encoded in the weights of the network, which leads to a loss of control and
interpretability. However, the latter techniques are often much more scalable,
especially at inference time. The balance between control and interpretability,
on the one hand, and scalability, on the other hand, is an open and important
research question in the NeSy community.
3. Logic - Syntax
InSection2,wehaveintroducedclausallogic,withoutpayingmuchattention
to the structure of the atoms and literals. This structure and its consequences
for StarAI and NeSy models are the topic of the present section. Consider the
following example:
14
Example 7: Propositional Clausal logic
Consider the following set of clauses.
mortal_socrates ← human_socrates.
mortal_aristotle ← human_aristotle.
human_socrates.
human_aristotle.
Here,theliteralsdonotpossessanyinternalstructure. Theyarepropositions,
which are atoms that we can only assign the value True or False. We say that
we are working in propositional logic.
This contrasts with first-order logic in which the literals take the form
p(t ,...,t ), with p a predicate of arity m and the t terms, that is, constants,
1 m i
variables, or structured terms of the form f(t ,...,t ), where f is a functor
1 q
and the t are again terms. Intuitively, constants represent objects or entities,
i
functors represent functions, variables make abstraction of specific objects, and
predicates specify relationships amongst objects. The subset of first order logic
where there are no functors is called relational logic.
Example 8: First order clausal logic
In contrast to the previous example, we now write the theory in a more
compact manner using first order logic. By convention, constants start with
a lowercase letter, while variables start with an uppercase. Essential is the
use of the variable X, which is implicitly universally quantified.
mortal(X) ← human(X).
human(socrates).
human(aristotle).
Itisinterestingtounderstandtheconnectionbetweenpropositional,relational
and first-order logic. To this end, we introduce the concept of grounding. When
anexpression(i.e,clause,atomorterm)doesnotcontainanyvariableitiscalled
ground. Asubstitutionθisanexpressionoftheform{X /c ,...,X /c }withthe
1 1 k k
X different variables, the c terms. Applying a substitution θ to an expression
i i
e (term, atom or clause) yields the instantiated expression eθ where all variables
X in e have been simultaneously replaced by their corresponding terms c in
i i
θ. We can take for instance the clause mortal(X) ← human(X) and apply
the substitution {X/socrates} to yield mortal(socrates) ← human(socrates).
Grounding is the process whereby all possible substitutions that ground the
clauses are applied. Notice that grounding a first order logical theory may result
in an infinite set of ground clauses (when there are functors), and a polynomially
larger set of clauses (when working with finite domains).
15
Finite domains are the focus in both StarAI and NeSy. In such domains, any
problem expressed in first-order logic can be equivalently expressed in relational
logic and any problem expressed in relational logic can likewise be expressed in
propositional logic by grounding out the clauses [94, 41].
3.1. Implications for StarAI
StarAI typically focus on first order logic [31, 106, 100]. In Section 2, we
have seen how StarAI models can be easily interpreted in terms of probabilistic
graphical models (PGM). Here, we want to show that FOL is a powerful tool for
building such models.
FOL allows for knowledge in the form of logical rules to be interpreted as
a template for defining the graphical models. Grounding the theory then
corresponds to unrolling the template. At the same time, first order logic has
also an important statistical and learning advantage: a FOL rule leads to
parameter sharing in the model as the parameters of a single FOL rule are
tied to all its groundings. Parameter sharing compresses the representation
of the corresponding probabilistic model, resulting in more efficient learning
and better generalization.
These properties are reminiscent of plate notation for probabilistic graphical
models, bringing logical reasoning into the picture [97]. In Example 4, we have
used only two first order rules but we obtained a larger graphical model with six
factors (see Figure 2) by grounding (i.e. unrolling) the rules over the domain.
All factors corresponding to the same rule share the same weight.
3.2. Implications for NeSy
NeSy exploits the internal structure of literals, resulting in many relational
and first-order systems. System exploiting propositional logic are Semantic
Loss (SL) [133] and DL2 [40]. Relational logic-based systems are DiffLog [112],
θILP [39], Lifted Relational Neural Networks (LRNN) [116], Neural Theorem
Provers (NTP) [102] and NeurASP [138]. Finally, many systems are based on
first-order logic or first-order logic programs, such as DeepProbLog [72], NLog
[121], NLProlog [131], DeepStochLog [132], Logic Tensor Networks [5], Semantic
Based Regularization [33], Relational Neural Machines [76] and Logical Neural
Networks [101].
The focus in NeSy on structured terms is strongly related to that in StarAI
and plays a fundamental role in NeSy. In fact, grounding a relational or
first-order theory can often be seen as unrolling either the architecture (e.g.,
DeepStochLog[132],LRNN[116])orthelossfunction(e.g.,SBR[33],LTN[5])of
the corresponding neural model. Unrolling fixed modules over multiple elements
of a complex data structure is fundamental to neural networks on sequences
(recurrent nets, RNN), trees (recursive nets, RvNN) and graphs (graph nets,
GNN). NeSy can be regarded as unrolling more complex logical structures, with
similar benefits in terms of model capacity, modularization and generalization,
and strong control due to the formal semantics.
16
Moreover, first-order NeSy models can explicitly deal with how subsymbolic
data (e.g. images or audio) are fed to the neural components of the system.In
fact,NeSysystemsoftenusesubsymbolicdatasamplesaselementsofthedomain
of discourse. For example, the element mary can be used to refer to an image,
e.g. mary = . Feeding such samples as input to a neural network can then be
naturally encoded as grounding a predicate over the domain of interest. When
the internal structure of the literals is absent, as in SL, this mapping must be
handled outside the logical framework.
While both relational logic and first-order logic have their advantages, there
is a noteworthy distinction in the latter. First-order logic allows representing
real valued functions through the use of functors. For example, segmentation
can be modeled as a functor returning the bounding box of an object inside
an image, e.g. location(mary,image) [115]. Therefore, FOL-based systems can
address regression tasks, diverging from the conventional classification tasks
associated with relational logic systems.
4. Logic - Semantics
4.1. Model-theoretic semantics
The semantics of logical, probabilistic logical and neurosymbolic systems is
defined in terms of a model theoretic semantics. In the present section, we will
restrict our attention to Herbrand interpretations and models as is usual in logic
programming and statistical relational AI (see Section 2).
We can distinguish three different levels of semantics, which are also closely
tied to the used syntax of the underlying logic.
First, when the logical theory consists of definite clauses only, the semantics
is given by the least Herbrand model. The least Herbrand model of a definite
clause theory is unique and it is the smallest w.r.t. set inclusion. It contains
all ground facts (from the Herbrand domain) that are logically entailed by the
theory. For instance, considering the facts a and b and the rules d←a,b and
b←c would give the least Herbrand model {a,b,d}.
Second, when the logical theory can contain any set of clauses, the semantics
is given by the set of all possible Herbrand models. For instance, considering
the clause a∨b yields the models {a},{b} and {a,b}. So there is not necessarily
a unique model, not even when considering only minimal models, where we have
{a},{b}.
Third, while Horn-clauses are the basis for "pure" Prolog and logic programs,
there exist several extensions to this formalism to accommodate negated literals
in the condition part of rules or disjunction in the head. A popular framework
in this regard is answer set programming (ASP). In ASP the clause a∨b could
be represented by two clauses a←¬b and b←¬a which would have two stable
models {a} and {b}.
4.2. Fuzzy semantics
The previous three levels of semantics are based on Boolean models, i.e.
models where each atom is either present (i.e. True) or absent (i.e. False).
17
Differently, fuzzy logic, and in particular t-norm fuzzy logic, assigns a truth
value to atoms in the continuous real interval [0,1]. Logical operators are then
turned into real-valued functions, mathematically grounded in the t-norm theory.
A t-norm t(x,y) is a real function t : [0,1]×[0,1] → [0,1] that models the
logical AND and from which the other operators can be derived. Table 2 shows
well-known t-norms and the functions corresponding to their connectives. A
fuzzy logic formula is mapped to a real valued function of its input atoms, as we
show in Example 9. Fuzzy logic generalizes Boolean logic to continuous values.
All the different t-norms are coherent with Boolean logic in the endpoints of the
interval [0,1], which correspond to completely true and completely false values.
The concept of model in fuzzy logic can be easily recovered from an extension of
the model-theoretic semantics of the Boolean logic. Any fuzzy interpretation is
a model of a formula if the formula evaluates to 1.
Example 9: Fuzzy logic
Let us consider the following propositions: alarm, burglary and earthquake.
Defining a fuzzy semantics for this language requires one to assign truth
degrees to each of the propositions and selecting a particular t-norm to
implement the connectives.
Let us consider the Łukasiewicz t-norm and the following interpretation of
the language:
I ={alarm=0.7,
t (x,y)=min(1,x+y)
∨
burglary=0.6,
t (x,y)=min(1,1−x+y)
→
earthquake=0.3}
Once we have defined the semantics of the language, we can evaluate logic
sentences, e.g.:
alarm←(burglary∨earthquake)=
min(1,1−min(1,burglary+earthquake)+alarm)=0.8
Thisevaluationcanbeperformedautomaticallybyparsingthelogicalsentence
in the corresponding expression tree and then compiling the expression tree
using the corresponding t-norm operation:
18
Product Łukasiewicz Gödel
x∧y x·y max(0,x+y−1) min(x,y)
x∨y x+y−x·y min(1,x+y) max(x,y)
¬x 1−x 1−x 1−x
x⇒y (x>y) y/x min(1,1−x+y) y
Table2: Logicalconnectivesontheinputsx,y whenusingthefundamentalt-norms.
← t (0.8)
←
alarm ∨ 0.7 t (0.9)
∨
burglary earthquake 0.6 0.3
The resulting circuit represents a differentiable function and the truth degree
of the sentence is computed by evaluating the circuit bottom-up.
4.3. Implications for StarAI
Statistical Relational AI has extended the previous semantics by defining
probability distributions p(ω) over models, or possible worlds2.
Thegoalistoreasonabouttheuncertaintyoflogicalstatements. Inparticular,
the probability that a certain formula α holds is computed as the sum of the
probabilities of the possible worlds that are models of α (i.e. where α is True):
(cid:88)
p(α)= p(ω) (1)
ω|=α
This is an instance of the Weighted Model Counting (WMC) problem. In fact,
we are counting how many worlds are models of α and we are weighting each of
them by its probability according to the distribution p(ω).
Example 10: Probabilistic Logic
Let us consider the following set of propositions B = burglary, E =
earthquake, J = hears_alarm_john and M = hears_alarm_mary. In
probabilistic logic, a probability distribution over all the possible worlds is
defined. For example, Table 3 represents a valid distribution.
2In this paper, we use the distribution semantics as representative of the probabilistic
approachtologic. WhilethisisthemostcommonsolutioninStarAI,manyothersolutions
exist[85,52],whosedescriptionisoutofthescopeofthecurrentsurvey. Adetailedoverview
ofthedifferentflavoursofformalreasoningaboutuncertaintycanbefoundin[53].
19
B E J M p(ω)
F F F F 0.2394
F F F T 0.1026
F F T F 0.3591
F F T T 0.1539
F T F F 0.0126
F T F T 0.0054
F T T F 0.0189
F T T T 0.0081
T F F F 0.0266
T F F T 0.0114
T F T F 0.0399
T F T T 0.0171
T T F F 0.0014 *
T T F T 0.0006 *
T T T F 0.0021 *
T T T T 0.0009 *
Table3: Adistributionoverpossibleworldsforthefourpropositionalvariablesburglary (B),
earthquake(E),hears_alarm_john(J)andhears_alarm_mary(M).The∗indicatesthose
worldswhereburglary∧earthquakeisTrue.
Suppose we want to compute the probability of the formula burglary ∧
earthquake. This is done by summing up the probabilities of all the worlds
where both burglary and earthquake are True (indicated by a ∗ in Table 3).
The StarAI community has provided several formalisms to define such proba-
bilitydistributionsoverpossibleworldsusinglabeledlogictheories. Probabilistic
Logic Programs (cf. Example 3) and Markov logic networks (cf. Example 4) are
two prototypical frameworks. For example, the distribution in Table 3 is the one
modeled by the ProbLog program in Example 3.
It is interesting to compare Markov Logic (Example 4) to ProbLog (Example
3) in terms of their model-theoretic semantics. Markov Logic is defined as a set
of weighted full clauses, i.e. as an unnormalized probability distribution over
full clausal theories. This means that, given any subset of the theory, there
can be many possible models. For instance, the theory a∨b, has three possible
models. To obtain a probability distribution over models, Markov Logic needs
to distribute the probability mass over its models. To do this, the maximum
entropy principle is used, which results in equal distributions of the probability
mass. Conversely, ProbLog defines a probability distribution over definite clause
theories, each obtained as subsets of the provided probabilistic facts. However,
since each of these theories has a unique least Herbrand model, the probability
mass corresponding to the selected facts is assigned to the corresponding unique
Herbrandmodel. Thismeansthatwhenworkingwithdefiniteclausesonly, there
is no need to distribute the probability mass to multiple models and, therefore,
20
AND (0.0435) *
OR hears_alarm(mary) (0.145) + 0.3
AND AND (0.045) * * (0.1)
¬burglary
OR burglary 1 - 0.1 + 0.1
earthquake ¬earthquake 0.05 1-0.05
Figure4: dDNNF(left)andarithmeticcircuit(right)correspondingtotheProbLogprogram
inExample3
no extra assumptions such as maximum entropy are necessary.
Probabilistic inference (i.e. weighted model counting) is generally intractable.
That is why, in StarAI, techniques such as knowledge compilation (KC) [25]
are used. Knowledge compilation transforms a logical formula α into a new
representation in an offline step, which can be computationally expensive. Using
thisnewrepresentationaparticularsetofqueriescanbeansweredefficiently(i.e.
in poly-time in the size of the new representation). From a probabilistic point
of view, this translation solves the disjoint-sum problem, which states that one
cannot simply sum up the probability of two disjuncts but also has to subtract
the probability of the intersection. After the translation, the probabilities of any
conjunction and of any disjunction can be simply computed by multiplying, resp.
summing up, the probabilities of their operands. Thus a logical formula α can
be compiled into an arithmetic circuit ac(α). The weighted model count of the
query formula can then simply be computed by evaluating the corresponding
arithmetic circuit bottom up; i.e. p(α)=ac(α).
Example 11: Knowledge Compilation
Let us consider the ProbLog program in Example 3 and the corresponding
tabular representation in Table 3. Let us consider the query q =calls(mary).
Now we can use Equation 1 to compute the probability p(q). To do this, we
iterate over the table and we sum all the probabilities of the worlds where
calls(mary) is True, which we know from Example 1 are those where either
burglary =T orearthquake=T andwherehears_alarm(mary)=T. This
yields p(q)=0.0435. This method would require us to iterate over 2N terms
21
(where N is the number of probabilistic facts).
Knowledge compilation compiles α into some normal form that is logically
equivalent. InFigure4,thetargetrepresentationisadecomposable,determin-
isticnegativenormalform(d-DNNF)[23], forwhichweightedmodelcounting
is poly-time in the size of the formula. Decomposability means that, for every
conjunction, the two conjuncts do not share any variables. Deterministic
means that, for every disjunction, the two disjuncts are mutually exclusive,
i.e., only one of the disjuncts can be true at the same time. The formula in
d-DNNF can then be straightforwardly turned into an arithmetic circuit by
substitutingANDnodeswithmultiplicationandORnodesbysummation. In
Figure 4, we show the d-DNNF and the arithmetic circuit of the distribution
defined by the ProbLog program in Example 3. The bottom-up evaluation of
this arithmetic circuit computes the correct marginal probability p(α) much
more efficiently than the naive iterative sum that we have computed before.
EventhoughprobabilisticBooleanlogicisthemostcommonchoiceinStarAI,
some approaches use probabilistic fuzzy logic. The most prominent approach
is Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) [3], illustrated in Example 12. Similarly to
Markov logic networks, Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) defines log linear models
where features are represented by ground clauses. However, PSL uses a fuzzy
semantics of the logical theory. Therefore, atoms are mapped to real valued
variables and ground clauses to real valued factors.
Example 12: Probabilistic Soft Logic
Let us consider the logical rule α=smokes(X)←stress(X) with weight β.
As we have seen in Example 4, Markov Logic translates the formula into a
discrete factor by using the indicator functions 1(ω,αθ):
ϕMLN(ω,α)=β1(ω,α{X/mary})+β1(ω,α{X/john})
Instead of discrete indicator functions, PSL [3] translates the formula into a
continuous t-norm based function:
t(ω,α)=min(1,1−stress(X)+smokes(X))
and the corresponding potential is then translated into the continuous and
differentiable function:
ϕPSL(ω,α)=βt(ω,α{X/mary})+βt(ω,α{X/john})
Another important taskin StarAI isMAPinference. In MAP inference, given
the distribution p(ω), one is interested in finding the interpretation ω⋆ where
p is maximal, i.e.
ω⋆ =argmaxp(ω) (2)
ω
22
When the ω is a boolean interpretation, i.e. ω ∈{0,1}n, like in ProbLog or
MLNs,thisproblemisrelatedtomaxSAT,whichisNP-hard. However,inPSL,
ω is a fuzzy interpretation, i.e. ω ∈[0,1]n and p(ω)∝exp (cid:0)(cid:80) β ϕ(ω,α ) (cid:1) is
i i i
a continuous and differentiable function. The MAP inference problem can
thus be approximated more efficiently than its boolean counterpart using
gradient-based techniques.
4.4. Implications for NeSy
We have seen that in StarAI, one can turn inference tasks into the evalua-
tion (as in KC) or gradient-based optimization (as in PSL) of a differentiable
parametric circuit. The parameters are scalar values (e.g. probabilities or truth
degrees) that are attached to basic elements of a logical theory (facts or clauses).
A natural way of carrying over the StarAI approach to NeSy is the reparam-
eterization method. Reparameterization substitutes the scalar values assigned
to facts or formulas with the output of a neural network. One can interpret this
substitution in terms of a different parameterization of the original model. Many
probabilisticmethodsparameterizetheunderlyingdistributionintermsofneural
components. In particular, as we show in Example 13, DeepProbLog exploits
neuralpredicatestocomputetheprobabilitiesofprobabilisticfactsastheoutput
of neural computations over vectorial representations of the constants, which is
similar to SL in the propositional counterpart (see Example 6). NeurASP also
inherits the concept of a neural predicate from DeepProbLog.
Example 13: Probabilistic semantics reparameterization in Deep-
ProbLog
DeepProbLog [72] is a neural extension of the probabilistic logic program-
ming language ProbLog. DeepProbLog allows images or other subsymbolic
representations as terms of the program.
Let us consider a possible neural extension of the program in Example 3. We
couldextendthepredicatecalls(X)withtwoextrainputs,i.e. calls(B,E,X).
B is supposed to contain an image of a security camera, while E is supposed
tocontainthetime-seriesofaseismicsensor. Wewouldliketoanswerqueries
like calls( , ,mary), i.e. what is the probability that mary calls, given
that the security camera has captured the image and the sensor the signal
.
DeepProbLog can answer this query using the following program:
nn(nn_burglary, [B]) :: burglary(B).
nn(nn_earthquake, [E]) :: earthquake(E).
0.3::hears_alarm(mary).
0.6::hears_alarm(john).
alarm(B,_) <- burglary(B).
alarm(_,E) <- earthquake(E).
calls(B,E, X) <- alarm(B,E), hears_alarm(X).
23
Here, the program has been extended in two ways. First, new arguments (i.e.
B and E) have been introduced in order to deal with the subsymbolic inputs.
Second, the probabilistic facts burglary and earthquake have been turned
into neural predicates. Neural predicates are special probabilistic facts that
are annotated by neural networks instead of by scalar probabilities.
Inference in DeepProbLog mimics that of ProbLog. Given the query and the
program, knowledge compilation is used to build the arithmetic circuit in
Figure 5.
Since the program is structurally identical to the purely symbolic one in
Example 11, the arithmetic circuit is exactly the same. The only only
difference is that some leaves of the tree (i.e. capturing probabilities of facts)
can now also be neural networks.
Given a set of queries that are True, i.e.:
D ={calls( , ,mary),
calls( , ,john),
calls( , ,mary),...},
we can train the parameters θ of the DeepProbLog program (both neural
networks and scalar probabilities) by maximizing the log-likelihood of the
training queries using gradient descent:
(cid:88)
max logp(q)
θ
q∈D
SimilarlytoDeepProbLog,NMLNsandRNMsuseneuralnetworkstoparam-
eterize the factors (or the weights) of a Markov Logic Network. [103] computes
marginal probabilities as logistic functions over similarity measures between
embeddings of entities and relations. An alternative solution to exploit a proba-
bilistic semantics is to use knowledge graphs (see also Appendix A) to define
probabilistic priors to neural network predictions, as done in [118].
SBR[33] and LTN[5] reparametrize fuzzy atoms using neural networks that
take as inputs the feature representation of the constants and return the corre-
sponding truth value, as shown in Example 14. Logical rules are then relaxed
into soft constraints using fuzzy logic. Many other systems exploit fuzzy logic to
inject knowledge into neural models [48, 68]. These methods can be regarded
as variants of a unique conceptual framework as the differences are often minor
and in the implementation details.
Example 14: Semantic-Based Regularization
Semantic-Based Regularization (SBR) [33] is an example of an undirected
model where fuzzy logic is exploited as a regularization term when training a
neural model.
Let us consider a possible grounding for the rule in Example 12:
24
*
0.3
+
* *
+
nn_earthquake
nn_burglary
Figure 5: A neural reparametrization of the arithmetic circuit in Example 11 as done by
DeepProbLog(cf. Example13). Dashedlinesindicateanegativeoutput,i.e1-x. Weusea
differentnotationfornegationthaninFigure4tostressthatbothleavesareparameterizedby
thesameneuralnetwork.
smokes(mary) ← stress(mary)
For each grounded rule r, SBR builds a regularization loss term L(r) in
the following way. First, it maps each constant c (e.g. mary) to a set of
(perceptual) features x (e.g. a tensor of pixel intensities x ). Each relation
c mary
r (e.g. smokes, stress) is then mapped to a neural network f (x), where x is
r
the tensor of features of the input constants and the output is a truth degree
in [0,1]. For example, the atom smokes(mary) is mapped to the function call
f (x ). Then, a fuzzy logic t-norm is selected and logic connectives are
smokes mary
mapped to the corresponding real valued functions. For example, when the
Łukasiewicz t-norm is selected, the implication is mapped to the binary real
function f(x,y)=min(1,1−x+y).
For the rule above, the Semantic-Based Regularization loss term is (for the
Łukasiewicz t-norm):
(cid:16) (cid:17)
LŁ(r)=min 1,1−f (x )+f (x )
stress mary smokes mary
The aim of Semantic-Based Regularization is to use the regularization term
together a with classical loss function for supervised learning to learn the
functions associated to the relations (here f and f ).
stress smokes
ItisworthcomparingthismethodwiththeSemanticLoss(Example6). Both
25
methods turn a logic formula (either propositional or first-order) to a real
valuedfunctionthatisusedasaregularizationterm. However, becauseofthe
different semantics, these two methods have different properties. On the one
hand, SL preserves the original logical semantics, by using probabilistic logic.
However, due to the probabilistic assumption, the input formula cannot be
compiled directly into a differentiable loss but needs to be first translated,
i.e. compiled, into an equivalent deterministic and decomposable formula.
While this step is necessary for the probabilistic model to be sound, the
size of the resulting formula can be exponential in the size of the grounded
theory. On the other hand, in SBR, the formula can be compiled directly into
a differentiable loss, whose size is linear in the size of the grounded theory.
However, in order to do so, the semantics of logic is altered, by turning it into
fuzzy logic.
Fuzzy logic can also be used to relax rules. For example, in LRNN[116],
∂ILP[39], DiffLog[112] and the approach of [129], the scores of the proofs are
computed using fuzzy logic connectives. The theory t-norms has identifying
parameterized (i.e. weighted) classes of t-norms [117, 101] that are very close
to standard neural computation patterns (e.g. ReLU or sigmoidal layers).
This creates an interesting, still not fully understood, connection between soft
logical inference and inference in neural networks. A large class of methods
[80,32,18,131]relaxeslogicalstatementsnumerically,withoutexplicitlydefining
a specific semantics. Usually, the atoms are assigned scores in R computed by
a neural scoring function over embeddings. Numerical approximations are
then applied either to combine these scores according to logical formulas or to
aggregateproofsscores. Theresultingneuralarchitectureisusuallydifferentiable
and, thus, trained end-to-end.
Some NeSy methods, such as PSL, have used mixed probabilistic and fuzzy
semantics. In particular, Deep Logic Models (DLM)[77] extend PSL by adding
neurally parameterized factors to the Markov field, while [57] uses fuzzy logic
to train posterior regularizers for standard deep networks using knowledge
distillation [55].
The semantics of computational logic has also been explored and extended
along other directions that have also been used within AI, for example, modal
and temporal logics [125]. While their analysis is out of the scope of the paper,
it is worth mentioning that also such formalisms have been investigation from a
neurosymbolic perspective [29, 30, 51].
5. Structure versus Parameter Learning
Learning approaches in StarAI and NeSy are usually distinguished as to
whether the structure [64] or the parameters of the model are learned [49, 70].
In structure learning, the learning task is to discover the logical theory, i.e., a set
of logical clauses and their corresponding probabilities or weights that reliably
explains the examples. What explaining the examples exactly means depends
26
on the learning setting. In discriminative learning, we are interested in learning
a theory that explains, or predicts, a specific target relation given background
knowledge. In generative learning, there is no specific target relation; instead,
we are interested in a theory that explains the interactions between all relations
in a dataset. In contrast to structure learning, parameter learning starts with a
given logical theory and only learns the corresponding probabilities or weights.
Structure learning is an inherently NP-complete problem of searching for the
right combinatorial structure, whereas parameter learning can be achieved with
any curve fitting technique, such as gradient descent or least-squares. While
parameter learning is, in principle, an easier problem to solve, it comes with a
strong dependency on the provided user input. If the provided clauses are of low
quality, theresultingmodelwillalsobeoflowquality. Structurelearning, onthe
other hand, is less dependent on the user provided input, but is an inherently
more difficult problem.
5.1. Implications for StarAI
Both structure and parameter learning are common in StarAI. Structure
learninginStarAisaninstanceoflearningbysearch[83]andiscloselyconnected
to program synthesis. The existing techniques are typically extensions of tech-
niques originating in inductive logic programming (ILP) [86, 94], which learn
deterministic logical theories, and probabilistic graphical models (PGMs), which
learn Bayesian or Markov networks from data. Being an instance of learning
by search, the central components of a learning framework are a space of valid
structures and a search procedure. In ILP, valid structures are logical theories;
forBayesiannetworks,validstructuresareDAGscapturingtheirgraphstructure.
The resulting search space is then traversed with generic search procedures.
StarAI structure learning techniques suffer from a combinatorial explosion.
ThatisespeciallythecasewithILPtechniques,inwhichthesearchspaceconsists
of programs containing several clauses. Therefore, it is necessary to limit the
search space to make learning tractable. The most common way to do this is to
impose a language bias – a set of instructions on how to construct the search
space,suchthatitisnarroweddowntoasubsetofthespaceofalllogicaltheories.
Though language bias can make the problem more tractable, it requires special
care: too many restrictions might eliminate the target theory, while too few
restrictions make the search space too large to traverse. Another strategy is to
leverage the compositionality of logic programs: adding an additional clause to
a program increases its coverage and does not affect the prediction of examples
covered by the initial program. That is, we can learn a single clause at a time
instead of simultaneously searching over theories containing multiple clauses.
Learning clauses and their probabilities is usually treated as a two stage
process. ILP-basedStarAIlearningtechniquesfirstidentifyuseful(deterministic)
clauses, and then learn the corresponding probabilities or weights via parameter
learning. Similarly,StarAImethodsgroundedprimarilyinPGMs,suchasMLNs,
search for frequently occurring cliques in data [65], lift them into logical clauses,
and then learn the weights or probabilities. Parameter learning techniques are
27
often also extensions of well known statistical approaches such as least-squares
regression [49], gradient descent [70], and expectation maximisation [50].
Example 15: Structure learning with ProbFoil
As an illustration of structure learning techniques, we will focus on Prob-
Foil[95]. Assumethatweareinterestedinlearningthedefinitionofgrandpar-
ent fromakinshipdata. Thatis,wearegivenasetofexamplesofgrandparent
relations
grandparent(abe,lisa).
grandparent(abe,bart).
grandparent(jacqueline,lisa).
grandparent(jacqueline,bart).
and background knowledge containing the following facts:
father(homer,lisa).
father(homer,bart).
father(abe,homer).
mother(jacqueline,marge).
mother(marge,bart).
mother(marge,lisa).
ProbFoil iteratively searches for a single clause that covers as many exam-
ples as possible, until all examples are covered or it adding more clauses
does not improve the results. While searching for the best clause, it starts
from the most general one, grandparent(X,Y), which effectively states that
every pair of people forms a grandparent relationship. Then it gradually
specialises the clause by adding literals to the body. For instance, extending
grandparent(X,Y) with a mother/2 predicate results in the following clauses
grandparent(X,Y) <- mother(X,Y).
grandparent(X,Y) <- mother(X,X).
grandparent(X,Y) <- mother(Y,X).
grandparent(X,Y) <- mother(Y,Y).
Extendingtheinitialclausewiththefather/2 resultsinsimilarclauses. Having
the new candidate clauses, ProbFoil scores each candidate by counting how
many positive and negative examples are covered. These candidate clauses
would not cover any examples and ProbFoil continues to refine the candidates
by adding another literal to the body. This would result in clauses of the
following form:
grandparent(X,Z) <- mother(X,Y), father(Y,Z).
grandparent(X,Z) <- mother(X,Y), mother(Y,Z).
grandparent(X,Z) <- father(X,Y), mother(Y,Z).
...
Some of the new candidates will cover only positive examples, such as
28
grandparent(X,Z) <- mother(X,Y), mother(Y,Z)
that covers both examples
grandparent(jacqueline,lisa).
grandparent(jacqueline,bart).
Having found one clause, ProbFoil learns the corresponding probability labels
and adds the clause to the theory. ProbFoil then repeats the same procedure,
starting with the most general clause, to cover the remaining examples.
5.2. Implications for NeSy
While StarAI learning techniques are categorised exclusively as either struc-
ture or parameter learning, NeSy learning techniques combine both. We will
now discuss four groups of NeSy learning approaches: neurally-guided search,
structure learning via parameter learning, program sketching, and implicitly
structure learning.
Neurally guided structure search [60, 37, 38, 122] is the NeSy paradigm most
similar to structure learning in StarAI. It addresses one of the major weaknesses
of StarAI structure learning methods - uninformed search over valid theories.
Instead, neurally guided search relies on a recognition model, typically a neural
network, to prioritise parts of the symbolic search space so that the target
model can be found faster. Generally speaking, the recognition model predicts
the probability of a certain structure, e.g. a predicate or an entire clause, to
be a part of the target model. For instance, Deepcoder [6] uses input-output
examples to predict the probability of each predicate appearing in the target
model. Therefore, Deepcoder turns a systematic search into an informed one by
introducing a ranking over predicates in the search space. Likewise, EC2 [37]
derivestheprobabilityofaprogramsolvingthetaskathand. Severalapproaches
push this direction further and explore the idea of replacing an explicit symbolic
model space with an implicit generative model over symbolic models [90, 74].
For instance, in [90], the authors learn a generative model over grammar rules,
conditioned on the examples. Structure learning is then performed by sampling
grammar rules from the generative model, according to their probability, and
evaluating them symbolically on the provided examples.
These approaches clearly show how symbolic search can be made tractable
by introducing various forms of guidance via neural models. These guidance-
based approaches reduce, to a large extent, the most important weakness of
symbolic structure learning approaches - the generation of many useless clauses
ormodels. Ontheotherhand,theseapproachesoftenneedlargeamountsofdata
for training, sometimes millions of examples [38] even though creating data is
relatively easy by enumerating random model structures and sampling examples
from them [38].
29
Example 16: Neurally-guided structure learning
To illustrate neurally-guided search, we use the approach of Zhang et al.
[140]. StarAI techniques for structure learning typically perform a systematic
search, which results in many useless models being tested. Given N atoms,
we can construct Nl clauses of length l; this is an enormous space that is
difficult to search efficiently.
Zhang et al. sidestep the systematic search by introducing a neural network
that chooses which programs to explore next. This search space is made of
clauses such that an empty clause is at the top and children are extensions
of the empty clause with all possible predicates; their children are further
extensions with all individual atoms.
The approach follows a top-down search strategy, exploring shorter clauses
before longer ones, with a twist: instead of following a predefined order,
the approach uses a neural network to decide which child to expand next.
The approach can be viewed as a best-first search with a heuristic function
implemented by a neural model. To this end, the network (1) encodes all
literals in each clause separately, (2) scores all literals, (3) pools the scores
of each literal per candidate, and (4) chooses the best candidate based on
their scores. Ordering the search space in this way leads to substantial
improvements in computation time, typically several orders of magnitude.
An alternative way to reduce the combinatorial complexity of learning is to
learn only a part of the program. This is known as program sketching: a user
provides an almost complete target model with certain parts being unspecified
(known as holes). For instance, when learning a model in the form of a (logic)
program for sorting numbers or strings, the user might leave the comparison
operator unspecified and provide the rest of the program. The learning task
is then to fill in the holes. Examples of NeSy systems based on sketching are
DeepProbLog and ∂4, which fill in the holes in a (symbolic) program via neural
networks.
The advantage of sketching is that it provides a nice interface for NeSy
systems, as the holes can be filled either symbolically or neurally. Holes provide
a clear interface in terms of inputs and outputs and are agnostic to the specific
implementation. The disadvantage of sketching is that the user still needs to
know, at least approximatively, the structure of the program. The provided
structure, the sketch, acts as a strong bias. Deciding which functionality is left
as a hole is a non-trivial issue: as the sketch becomes less strict, the search space
becomes larger.
Structure learning via parameter learning (Example 17) is arguably the most
prominent learning paradigm in NeSy, positioned in between the two StarAI
learning paradigms. Structure learning via parameter learning is technically
equivalent to parameter learning in that the learning tasks consists of learning
the probabilities of a fixed set of clauses. However, in contrast to StarAI in
30
which the user carefully selects the informative clauses, the clauses are typically
enumerated from user-provided templates of predefined complexity. Constructed
in this way, the majority of clauses are noisy and erroneous and are of little
use. They would receive very low, but non-zero, probabilities. Approaches that
follow this learning principle include NTPs [102], ∂ILP [39], DeepProbLog[72],
NeuralLP [137] and DiffLog [112].
The advantage of structure learning via parameter learning is that it removes
the combinatorial search from the learning. However, the number of clauses
that needs to be considered is still extremely large, which leads to difficult
optimisation problems (cf. [39]). Furthermore, irrelevant clauses are never
removed from the model and are thus always considered during inference. This
can lead to spurious interactions even when low probabilities are associated to
irrelevant clauses: as the number of irrelevant clauses is extremely large, their
cumulative effect can be substantial.
Example 17: Structure learning via parameter learning
As an illustration of structure learning via parameter learning, we focus on
DiffLog [112]. DiffLog expects the candidate clauses to be provided by the
user. The user can either provide the rules she knows are useful or construct
them by using a clause template and instantiating it [20]..
Given a set of positive examples, DiffLog proceeds by constructing derivation
trees for each example. Consider the problem of learning the connectivity
relation over a graph. The input tuples (background knowledge in StarAI
terminology) specify edges in a graph
edge(a,b). edge(b,c). edge(b,d). edge(d,e). edge(c,f).
The examples indicate the connectivity relations among the nodes in the
graph (for simplicity, consider only the following two examples)
connected(a,b). connected(a,c).
Also assume that the candidate clause set contains the following clauses (with
p and p their weights):
1 2
p ::connected(X,Y) <- edge(X,Y).
1
p ::connected(X,Y) <- edge(X,Z), connected(Z,Y).
2
Derivation trees are essentially proofs of individual examples that corre-
spond to branches in the SLD-tree [69]. For instance, the example con-
nected(a,b) can be proven using the first clause, whereas the example con-
nected(a,c) can be proven by chaining the two clauses (connected(a,c) ←
edge(a,b),connected(b,c) and connected(b,c)←edge(b,c)).
DiffLog uses derivation trees to formulate the learning problem as numerical
optimisation over the weights associated with the rules. More precisely,
DiffLog defines the probability of deriving an example as the product of
the weights associated to the clauses used in the derivation tree of the
corresponding example. For instance, DiffLog would formulate the learning
31
problem for the two examples as follows
min (1−p ) +(1−p ×p ).
1 1 2
p1,p2 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
connected(a,b) connected(a,c)
Thelastgroupofapproacheslearnsthestructureofaprogramonlyimplicitly.
For instance, Neural Markov Logic Networks (NMLN) [78], a generalisation
of MLNs, extract structural features from relational data. Whereas MLNs
define potentials only over cliques defined by the structure (logical formulas)
of a model, NMLNs add potentials over fragments of data (projected over a
subset of constants). NMLNs thus do not necessarily depend on the symbolic
structure of the model, be it learned or provided by a user, but can still learn to
exploit relational patterns present in data. Moreover, NMLNs can incorporate
embeddings of constants. The benefit of this approach is that it removes
combinatorial search from learning and performs learning via more scalable
gradient-based methods. However, one loses the ability to inspect and interpret
the discovered structure. Additionally, to retain tractability, NMLNs limit the
size of fragments which imposes limits on the complexity of the discovered
relational structure.
6. Symbolic vs subsymbolic representations
Inneurosymbolicartificialintelligence,approachescanbecharacterizedbythe
way they represents entities and relationships in two classes: symbolic methods,
whereentitiesarerepresentedusingsymbolssuchasstringsandnaturalnumbers,
and subsymbolic methods, where entities are represented using numerical or
distributed representations.
Symbolic representations include constants (an,bob), numbers (4,−3.5), vari-
ables (X,Y) and structured terms f(t ,...,t ) where f is a functor and the t
1 n i
are constants, variables or structured terms. Structured terms are a powerful
construct that can represent arbitrary structures over entities, such as relations,
lists or trees. subsymbolic AI systems, such as neural networks, require that en-
tities are represented numerically using vectors, matrices or tensors. Throughout
this this section, we will call these subsymbolic representations or subsymbols.
subsymbolic AI systems usually require that these representations have a fixed
size and dimensionality. Exceptions require special architectures and are still
the subject of active research (e.g. RNNs for list-like inputs or GCNs [63] for
graph-type inputs).
Comparing representations. A powerful and elegant mechanism for reasoning
with symbols in logic is unification. Essentially, it calculates the most general
substitution that makes two symbols syntactically equal, if it exists. This does
not allow one to compare two different entities, but allows one to find what
two structured terms have in common. For instance, the terms p(a,Y) and
p(X,b) can be unified using the substitution {X = a,Y = b}. Conversely,
32
due to their numerical nature, calculating the similarity between subsymbols is
straightforward. Similarity metrics such as the radial-basis function or distance
metrics such as the L1 and L2 norm can be used. However, it is not clear when
to decide that two subsymbolically represented entities are the same.
Translating between representations. Many systems need to translate back and
forthbetweensymbolicandsubsymbolicrepresentations. Infact,alotofresearch
on deep learning is devoted to efficiently representing symbols so that neural
networks can properly leverage them. A straightforward example is to translate
symbols to a subsymbolic representation that can serve as input for a neural
network. Generally, these symbols are replaced by a one-hot encoding or by
learnedembeddings. Note,however,thatthisdoesnotimplythatthesystemcan
performsymbolicmanipulationonthisinput. Rather,itservesasanindextoaset
of learned, latent embeddings. A more interesting example is encoding relations
in subsymbolic space. The wide variety of methods [13, 120, 136] developed
for this purpose indicates that this is far from a solved problem. Different
encodings have different benefits. For example, TransE [13] encodes relations as
vector translations from subject to object embeddings. A disadvantage is that
symmetric relations are represented by the null vector, and entities in symmetric
relations are pushed towards each other. More complex structures are even
harder to represent. For example, there is currently a lot of research in how to
utilize graph-structured data in neural networks (cf. Appendix A).
Translating from a subsymbolic representation back to a symbolic one hap-
pens, for example, at the end of a neural network classifier. Here, a subsymbolic
vectorneedstobetranslatedtodiscreteclasses. Generally, thishappensthrough
theuseofafinallayerwithasoft-maxactivationfunctionwhichthenmodelsthe
confidence scores of these classes as a categorical distribution. However, other
options are possible. For example, some methods are only interested in the most
likely class, and will use an arg-max instead. Alternatively, a Gumbel-softmax
activation can be used as a differentiable approximation of sampling from the
categorical distribution.
6.1. Implications for StarAI and NeSy
In StarAI systems, the input, intermediate and output representations are all
usingthesamesymbolicrepresentations. AlthoughthereareStarAIsystemsthat
cansupportnumericalvalues,thesearestilltreatedassymbols,whichisdifferent
than a latent, subsymbolic representation. In neural systems, the input and
intermediate representations are subsymbolic. The output representation can be
eithersymbolic(e.g. classifiers)orsubsymbolic(e.g. auto-encoders,GANs). The
most important aspect of neurosymbolic systems is that they combine symbolic
and subsymbolic representations. NeSy systems can be categorized by how they
do this. We distinguish several approaches.
In the first approach, the inputs are symbolic, but they are translated to
subsymbols in a single translation step, after which the intermediate representa-
tions used during reasoning are purely subsymbolic. This approach is followed
33
by the majority of NeSy methods. Some examples include Logic Tensor Net-
works [5], Semantic-based Regularization [33], Neural Logic Machines [35] and
TensorLog [18].
Example 18: Logic Tensor Networks
Logic tensor networks [5] make this translation step explicit. The authors
introduce the concept of a grounding (not to be confused with the term
grounding used in logic). Here, a grounding is a mapping of all symbolic
entitiesontotheirsubsymboliccounterpart. Moreformally,theauthorsdefine
a grounding as a mapping G where:
• G(c)∈Rn for every constant symbol c
• G(f)∈Rn.m →Rn for every function f of arity n
• G(p)∈Rn.m →[0,1] for every predicate p of arity n
Thegroundingofaclauseisthenperformedbycombiningtheaforementioned
groundings using a t-norm.
In the second approach, intermediate representations are both symbolic
and subsymbolic, but not simultaneously. This means that some parts of the
reasoning work on the subsymbolic representation, and other parts deal with the
symbolic representation, but not at the same time. This is indicative of NeSy
methods that implement an interface between the logic and neural aspect. This
approach is more natural for systems that originate from a logical framework
such as DeepProbLog [72], NeurASP [138]), ABL [22] and NLog [121].
Example 19: ABL
In ABL [22] there are three components that function in an alternating
fashion. There is a perception model, a consistency checking component and
an abductive reasoning component. Take for example the task where there
are3MNISTimagesthatneedtoberecognizedsuchthatthelastistheresult
of applying an operation on the first two (e.g. + = ). The structure
of the expression is given as background knowledge, but the exact operation
(addition) needs to be abduced. First, the perception model classifies the
images into pseudo-labels, using the most likely prediction (i.e. arg-max).
Theabductivereasoningcomponentthentriestoabducealogicallyconsistent
hypothesis. For example, if the digits are correctly classified as 3, 5 and 8,
the only logically consistent hypothesis is that the operation is an addition. If
thisisnotpossible,thereisanerrorinthepseudo-labels. Aheuristicfunction
is then used to determine which pseudo-labels are wrong. The reasoning
module then searches for logically consistent pseudo-labels. These revised
pseudo-labels are then used to retrain the perception model.
In the final approach, intermediate representations are considered simul-
34
taneously as symbolic and subsymbolic by the reasoning mechanism.This is
implemented in only a few methods, such as the NTP[102] and the CTP[81].
Example 20: Neural Theorem Prover
In the Neural Theorem Prover[102], two entities can be unified if they are
similar, and not just if they are identical. As such, the NTP interweaves
both symbols and subsymbols during inference. For each symbol S, there is
a learnable subsymbol T . Soft-unification happens by applying the normal
S
unification procedure where possible. However, if two symbols S and S can
1 2
not be unified, the comparison is assigned a score based on the similarity
betweenT andT . Thesimilarityiscalculatedusingaradialbasisfunction
S1 S2
φ(||x−y|| ).
2
For example, to unify mother(an,bob) and parent(X,bob), soft-unification
proceeds as follows:
{mother(an,bob)=parent(X,bob)}
⇓ φ(mother,parent)
{an=X,bob=bob}
⇓ X =an
{bob=bob}
⇓
{ }
Soft-unification is not only used to learn which constants and predicates
are similar, but can also be used to perform rule learning. By adding new,
parameterized rules with unique predicates, soft-unification allows these new
predicates to become very similar to other predicates and as such behave as
newly introduced rules. For example, consider the program consisting of the
fact mother(an,bob) and a single parameterized rule r1(X,Y) ← r2(Y,X).
The Neural Theorem Prover can answer the query child(bob,an) as follows:
child(bob,an)
(1) (2)
T r2(ann,bob)
(3)
T
35
(1) child=mother φ(||T −T || )
child mother 2
bob=an φ(||T −T || )
an bob 2
(2) child=r1 φ(||T −T || )
child r1 2
(3) child=r2 φ(||T −T || )
r2 mother 2
Thefigureaboveshowsthetwopossiblederivationstheneuraltheoremprover
can make to infer child(bob, an). One the one hand, it can soft-unify with the
fact mother(an, bob), where mother unifies with child and an with bob. On
the other hand, it can use the parameterized rule which encodes an inverse
relation. In that case, mother unifies with r1 and r2 with child. If we
optimize the subsymbolic embeddings for the latter, this will be equivalent to
learning the rule mother(X,Y)←child(Y,X). This example also shows that
soft-unification potentially adds a lot of different proofs, which can result in
computational problems. This problem was solved in later iterations of the
system [79].
7. Logic vs Probability vs Neural
When two or more paradigms are integrated, examining which of the base
paradigms are preserved, and to which extent, tells us a lot about the strengths
and weaknesses of the resulting paradigm. It has been argued [98] that when
combining different perspectives in one model or framework, such as logic,
probabilistic and neural ones, it is desirable to have the original paradigms as a
special case.
In this section, we analyze to which extent different models in StarAI and
NeSypreservethethreebasicparadigms. Intuitively,withpreservingwemeanto
which extent one can exactly replicate the model and inference algorithm of the
original paradigm. We will use the capital letters L, P and N to label systems
where the logic, probability and neural paradigms can be recovered in full. We
will use lowercase letters (i.e. l, p and n) when a method only partially recovers
these paradigms, i.e. retain some but not all of the features. The absence of a
letter means that the paradigm is not considered by an approach.
7.1. StarAI: Logic + Probability
Traditionally, StarAI focused on the integration of logic and probability.
lP: The classical knowledge-based model construction approach uses logic
only to generate a probabilistic graphical model. Thus the graphical model can
be used to define the semantics of the model and also to perform inference. This
canmakeithardertounderstandtheeffectsofapplyinglogicalinferencerulesto
the model. For instance, in MLNs, the addition of the resolvent of two weighted
rules makes it hard to predict the effect on the distribution.
Lp: On the other hand, the opposite holds for probabilistic logic programs
(PLPs) and their variants. While the effect of a logical operation is clear, it
36
is harder to identify and exploit properties such as conditional or contextual
independencies, that are needed for efficient probabilistic inference.
7.2. NeSy: Logic + Probability + Neural
In NeSy, we consider a third paradigm: neural computation. With neural
computation, we refer mainly to the set of models and techniques that allows
for exploiting (deep) latent spaces to learn intermediate representations. This
includesdealingwithperceptualinputsandalsodealingdirectlywithembeddings
of symbols.
lN: Many NeSy approaches focus on the neural aspect (i.e., they originated
as a neural method to which logical components have been added). For example,
LTNs and SBRs turn the logic into a regularization function to provide a
penalty whenever the logical constraints are violated. At test time the logical
loss component is dropped and only the network is used to make predictions.
Moreover, by using fuzzy logic, these methods do not integrate the probabilistic
paradigm.
Ln: Another class of NeSy methods does retain the focus on logic. These
methods usually expand an existing logical framework into a differentiable
version. Examples include LRNNs [116], TensorLog [18], DiffLog [112], ∂ILP
[39], ∂4 [14] and NTPs [102]. The key inference concepts are mapped onto an
analogous concept that behaves identically for the edge cases but is continuous
and differentiable in non-deterministic cases. As described in the previous
sections, many such systems cast logical inference as forward or backward
chaining. The focus on logic is clear if one considers that logical inference is
performed symbolically to build the network and the semantics is relaxed only
in a subsequent stage to learn the parameters. While the architecture mimics
the logical reasoning, it is often far from the deep-stacked architecture of neural
networks.
LN: It is worth mentioning a later iteration of LRNN, where the framework
hasbeenextendedtoallowfortensorialweightsonatomsandcustomaggregation
functions [117]. In that framework, it is shown how specifying logic rules can be
regarded as specifying the layers of a deep architecture. This provides a nice
and complete integration between forward-chaining logical reasoning and neural
networks that is able to implement any existing neural architecture.
lPN andLpN Therearetwofinalclassesofmethodsthatstartfromexisting
StarAI methods, lP and Lp respectively, and extend them with primitives that
can be interfaced with neural networks and allow for differentiable operations.
In the lPN class, NeSy methods such as SL, RNMs and NMLNs follow the
knowledge-based model construction paradigm. In the LpN class, methods such
as DeepProbLog and NeurASP extend PLP.
There is usually a trade-off that one must make: systems in the lN or Ln
classes are usually more scalable but (i) do not model a probability distribution
and(ii) oftenrelaxthelogic. Onthecontrary, LpN orlPN systemspreservethe
original paradigms but at the cost of more complex inference (e.g. they usually
resort to exact probabilistic inference).
37
An aspect that significantly aids in developing a common framework, and
analysing its properties, is the development of an intermediate representation
language that can serve as a kind of assembly language [143]. One such idea
concernsperformingprobabilisticinferencebymappingitontoaweightedmodel
counting (WMC) problem. This can then in turn be solved by compiling it into
a structure (e.g. an arithmetic circuit) that allows for efficient inference. This
has the added benefit that this structure is differentiable, which facilitates the
integration between logic based systems and neural networks. StarAI based
systems often use this approach.
8. Tasks
In this Section, we analyze the learning tasks to which the NeSy models
considered in this paper have been applied.
DistantSupervision. AclassicaltaskinNeSyistouselogicasdistantsupervision
for a learning model. Here, input X is paired with label y. However, instead of
using a single model to map X to y, the input X is firstly mapped to a set of
intermediate concepts C by a (set of) neural networks. Then, these concepts
are used to compute y in a symbolic way. Logic programs are usually exploited
to map the concepts C, represented as logical atoms, to the label y, which
represents the logical query. Therefore, the neural networks are not directly
supervised (on C) but they are only distantly supervised through the label y
and the knowledge contained in the logic program. The intuition is that when
the label y is only weakly linked to the input, it is more convenient to break
the task in several easier subtasks and then compose them using background
knowledge in the form of a logic program. Notice that the logic program is
fundamental for the inference. Without the program, the networks will not be
able to solve their subtasks, as there is no direct supervision. Moreover, by
splitting the task into subtasks, the inference done by the composite system
(neural + logic) is far more explainable than a corresponding end-to-end neural
network. A classical example is the MNIST addition [72], shown in Example
21. Distant supervision tasks are very common in prototypical systems such as
DeepProbLog, DeepStochLog, NLog, NeurASP, SATNet [127]. A downside of
such tasks is that, to enable learning of untrained neural subtasks, the logic has
to consider all possible combinations of concepts that are compatible with the
label y, even though only few (or one) are correct. The challenge is to balance
the exploration of multiple combinations with a greedy strategy for scaling to
larger problems [121, 73, 71]. Other problems falling in this category are scene
parsing, image segmentation and semantic image interpretation [34, 2]
Example 21: MNIST Addition
Given the classical MNIST dataset, D = {(x ,y )}, with x an MNIST
i i i
image, and y its numeric label, the MNIST addition dataset is built by
i
mapping pairs of images to the label representing their sum. In particular,
38
D = {(x ,x ,z ) : z = y +y ∧(x ,y ),(x ,y ) ∈ D}. The idea is to
add i j ij ij i j i i j j
learn to classify the digits without direct supervision on their labels, but only
using distant supervision about sums of such images. The task is often also
coupled to background knowledge of what addition is, e.g. in Prolog syntax:
addition(X1, X2, Z) <- digit(X1,Y1), digit(X2,Y2), Z is Y1 + Y2.
Such knowledge is used to reason about the (most-likely) pairs Y1,Y2 that
sum to the provided label Z. Logic is then used to link the actual outputs of
the learning model Y1,Y2 to the distant supervision Z.
Semi-supervised Classification. A related class of tasks is semi-supervised classi-
fication [15] with knowledge. Here, the starting point is a standard classification
task, where a set of inputs X is mapped by a neural model to a set of labels C.
However, we are also provided with some additional knowledge y related to the
labelsC oftheinputs. Thisknowledgeisoftenexpressedintermsoflogicalrules
and programs. The setting is very similar to distant supervision, where we have
threelevels: inputs X, concepts C andadditional labels y. However, in thiscase,
we have also access to supervision for some (usually few) concepts C. Although
this task could be tackled in a purely supervised way by discarding the informa-
tioncontainediny,NeSyapproachescanimprovethepredictionsofseveralinput
patterns using the external knowledge. When the external knowledge is relating
concepts C of multiple patterns, the task is called collective classification [109],
as one can improve the accuracy on multiple patterns by collectively predicting
their classes. A classical example in this setting is document classification in
citation networks, cf. Example 22. By treating the information contained in
y as extra knowledge, these tasks are often tackled using regularization based
systems, like SBR[33], DLM[77], RNM[76] or Semantic Loss[133]. However, logic
programs can also be used to simulate a label-passing scheme along the citation
network, as done in DeepStochLog [132]. A characteristic of this class of tasks is
thattheadditionalinformationy isoftenverynoisy(e.g. themanifoldruleinthe
citation network is not always valid). While this task is closely related to distant
supervision, there is an important difference: in semi-supervised classification,
the additional knowledge y is meant to provide an additional signal, which,
however, would not suffice in the absence of direct supervision on the concepts
C.
Example 22: Document classification in citation networks
In document classification in citation networks, we are provided with both
labelled and unlabelled scientific papers. A label is often the domain area
of the paper (e.g. Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, Databases, etc.).
However, a network of citations between papers is also provided, linking
papers between domains.
The idea of the document classification task is that in many domains, a
paper cited by other papers with a certain label is likely to belong to the
39
same domain. When classifying a document, one has to balance the signal
coming from the features of the document (i.e. words) and that coming from
neighbors in the citation network to provide a collective prediction.
InNeSysystems, thisisusuallydonebycouplingthesubsymbolicmodelwith
a rule of the following type:
w:: domain(X,Y) <- cite(X,X1), domain(X1,Y).
The rules get a different weight according to the domain to account for the
differences between them.
Knowledge Graph Completion. Another common task in NeSy is knowledge
graph completion (KGC) or link prediction. A knowledge graph (KG) is a pair
of(E,R), whereN isthesetofentitiesandR thesetofedges. InaKG,anedge
is a triple (e ,r,e ), where e and e are the head and tail of the edge and r is
1 2 1 2
the relation between them. In a KGC task, the goal is to predict missing edges
in the input graph. Link prediction has been one of the key tasks in StarAI
[44], and more recently also in NeSy as NeSy allows to merge symbolic reasoning
(from StarAI) with the recent geometric deep learning approaches based on
Knowledge Graph Embeddings (KGE) [128] and Graph Neural Networks [107].
NeSy systems focusing on this task include NTPs [102], NMLN [78], DLM [77],
DiffLog [112], TensorLog [18].
Generative Tasks. Most previously mentioned tasks can be described as clas-
sification3. NeSy has recently also focused on tasks concerned with modeling
the input data distribution as accurately as possible. The goal is then to sample
new patterns from the learned distribution. The idea behind NeSy generative
approaches is that one can learn important features from data using deep gen-
erative models (e.g. variational auto-encoders or Markov Chain Monte Carlo
methods). Combining symbolic features with logic reasoning can be used to
control, stratify and simplify the inference. The generative modeling can either
refer to the relational structure, e.g. molecule generation in NMLNs [78], or to
the subsymbolic space, e.g. image generation in VAEL [82] or [114].
Knowledge Induction. Rather than exploiting symbolic knowledge predictive
tasks, one can also induce symbolic knowledge. In all previous tasks, symbolic
knowledge is provided by the user as part of the input. However, as explored in
Section 5, we can still apply several neurosymbolic techniques by learning the
symbolicknowledgewhenthisisnotthecase. Theunknownsymbolicknowledge
is then the actual target to be learned. A classical example is program synthesis,
where the goal is to learn the program from positive and negative examples of
the desired input-output behaviour. Ideally, all positive pairs and none of the
negatives should be covered. Many systems learn logic programs, i.e. NTPs
3Eventhough,manyofthemuseagenerativemodeltotackletheclassificationtask,instead
ofaconditionalone.
40
[102], ∂ILP [39], DeepProbLog[72], NeuralLP[137], DiffLog[112], DeepCoder[6].
Sometimes, the input-output pairs are not part of the training dataset, but
are actually generated by a black-box neural model. The induced programs
then explain the behaviour of the model, which relates NeSy to the domain of
explainability [17].
9. Open Challenges
To conclude, we list some interesting challenges for NeSy.
Semantics. The statistical relational AI and probabilistic graphical model com-
munities have devoted a lot of attention to the semantics of its models. This
has resulted in several clear choices (such as directed vs. undirected, trace-based
vs. possible world [104]), with corresponding strengths and weaknesses that
clarify the relationships between the different models. Workshops have been
held on this topic4. Furthermore, some researchers have investigated how to
transform one type of model into another [59]. At the same time, weighted
model counting has emerged as a common assembly language for inference. The
situation in neurosymbolic computation today is very much like that of the early
days in statistical relational learning, in which there were many competing for-
malisms, sometimes characterized as the statistical relational learning alphabet
soup. It would be great to get more insight into the semantics of neurosymbolic
approaches and their relationships. This survey hopes to contribute towards this
goal.
Probabilistic reasoning. Although relatively few methods explore the integration
of logical and neural methods from a probabilistic perspective, we believe that
a probabilistic approach is a very natural way to integrate the two, since it
has been shown [98] how one can recover the single methods as special cases.
However, many open questions remain. Probabilistic inference is computation-
ally expensive, usually requiring approximations. It would be interesting to
determine exactly how probabilistic approximate inference compares with other
approximations based on relaxations of the logic, like fuzzy logic.
Fuzzy semantics. The selection of the t-norm fuzzy logic and the corresponding
translation of the connectives is very heterogeneous in the literature. It is often
unclear which properties of Boolean logic a model is preserving, while there is
a tendency to consider fuzzy logic as a continuous surrogate of Boolean logic
without considering implications for the semantics. There is a clear need for
furtherstudiesinthisfield. Ontheonehand,onemaywanttodefinenewmodels
whicharenativelyfuzzy, thusnotrequiringatranslationfromBooleanlogic. On
the other hand, an interesting research direction concerns the characterisation of
what are appropriate fuzzy approximations of Boolean logic relative to a set of
properties that one wants to preserve (see Section 4).
4Forinstance,https://pps2018.luddy.indiana.edu/
41
Structure learning. While significant progress has been made on learning the
structure of purely relational models (without probabilities), learning StarAI
models remains a major challenge due to the complexity of inference and the
combinatorial nature of the problem. Incorporating neural aspects complicates
the problem even more. NeSy methods have certainly shown potential for
addressing this problem (Section 5), but the existing methods are still limited
and mostly domain-specific which impedes their wide application. For instance,
the current systems that support structure learning require user effort to specify
the clause templates or write a sketch of a model.
Scalinginference. ScalableinferenceisamajorchallengeforStarAIandtherefore
also for NeSy approaches with an explicit logical or probabilistic reasoning
component. Investigating to what extent neural methods can help with this
challenge by means of lifted (exploiting symmetries in models) or approximate
inference,aswellasreasoningfromintermediaterepresentations[1],arepromising
future research directions.
Data efficiency. A major advantage of StarAI methods, as compared to neural
ones, is their data efficiency – StarAI methods can efficiently learn from small
amounts of data, whereas neural methods are data hungry. On the other hand,
StarAI methods do not scale to big data sets, while neural methods can easily
handle them. We believe that understanding how these methods can help each
other to overcome their complementary weaknesses, is a promising research
direction.
Symbolic representation learning. The effectiveness of deep learning comes from
the ability to change the representation of the data so that the target task
becomes easier to solve. The ability to change the representation also at the
symbolic level would significantly increase the capabilities of NeSy systems. This
isamajoropenchallengeforwhichneurallyinspiredmethodscouldhelpachieve
progress [19, 36].
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the Research Foundation-Flanders
(FWO)(G.Marra: 1239422N,S.Dumančić: 12ZE520N,R.Manhaeve: 1S61718N).
Luc De Raedt has received funding from the Flemish Government (AI Research
Program), from the FWO, from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement No 694980 SYNTH: Synthesising Inductive Data Models) and the
Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded
by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. This work was also supported
by TAILOR, a project funded by EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under GA No 952215.
42
References
[1] Ralph Abboud, İsmail İlkan Ceylan, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Learning
to reason: Leveraging neural networks for approximate DNF counting. In
34th Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020, New York, NY,
USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 3097–3104. AAAI Press, 2020.
[2] Marjan Alirezaie, Martin Längkvist, Michael Sioutis, and Amy Loutfi.
Semantic referee: A neural-symbolic framework for enhancing geospatial
semantic segmentation. Semantic Web, 10(5):863–880, 2019.
[3] Stephen H. Bach, Matthias Broecheler, Bert Huang, and Lise Getoor.
Hinge-loss markov random fields and probabilistic soft logic. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 18:109:1–109:67, 2017.
[4] Sebastian Bader and Pascal Hitzler. Dimensions of neural-symbolic inte-
gration - A structured survey. In Sergei N. Artëmov, Howard Barringer,
Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Luís C. Lamb, and John Woods, editors, We
Will Show Them! Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay, Volume One, pages
167–194. College Publications, 2005.
[5] Samy Badreddine, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Luciano Serafini, and Michael
Spranger. Logic tensor networks. Artif. Intell., 303:103649, 2022.
[6] MatejBalog,AlexanderL.Gaunt,MarcBrockschmidt,SebastianNowozin,
and Daniel Tarlow. Deepcoder: Learning to write programs. In 5th
InternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,ICLR2017, Toulon,
France, April 24-26, 2017. OpenReview.net, 2017.
[7] Pablo Barceló, Egor V. Kostylev, Mikaël Monet, Jorge Pérez, Juan L.
Reutter, and Juan Pablo Silva. The logical expressiveness of graph neural
networks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net,
2020.
[8] Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-
Gonzalez, Vinícius Flores Zambaldi, Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tac-
chetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Çaglar Gülçehre,
H.FrancisSong,AndrewJ.Ballard,JustinGilmer,GeorgeE.Dahl,Ashish
Vaswani, Kelsey R. Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer,
Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet Kohli, Matthew Botvinick, Oriol
Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases, deep
learning, and graph networks. CoRR, abs/1806.01261, 2018.
[9] Radim Bělohlávek, Joseph W Dauben, and George J Klir. Fuzzy logic and
mathematics: a historical perspective. Oxford University Press, 2017.
[10] Yoshua Bengio and Gary Marcus. Ai debate: The best way forward
for ai https://montrealartificialintelligence.com/aidebate/, (checked on 13
december 2021), 2020.
43
[11] Tarek R. Besold, Artur d’Avila Garcez, and Luis C. Lamb. Human-Like
Neural-Symbolic Computing (Dagstuhl Seminar 17192). Dagstuhl Reports,
7(5):56–83, 2017.
[12] Tarek R. Besold, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Sebastian Bader, Howard Bow-
man, Pedro M. Domingos, Pascal Hitzler, Kai-Uwe Kühnberger, Luís C.
Lamb, Daniel Lowd, Priscila Machado Vieira Lima, Leo de Penning, Gadi
Pinkas, Hoifung Poon, and Gerson Zaverucha. Neural-symbolic learning
and reasoning: A survey and interpretation. CoRR, abs/1711.03902, 2017.
[13] Antoine Bordes, Nicolas Usunier, Alberto García-Durán, Jason Weston,
and Oksana Yakhnenko. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-
relational data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27,
NeurIPS 2013, December 5-8, 2013, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, pages2787–2795,
2013.
[14] MatkoBosnjak,TimRocktäschel,JasonNaradowsky,andSebastianRiedel.
Programming with a differentiable forth interpreter. In Doina Precup and
YeeWhyeTeh,editors,34thInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,
ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 547–556. PMLR, 2017.
[15] OlivierChapelle,BernhardSchölkopf,andAlexanderZien. Semi-supervised
learning. The MIT Press Cambridge, MA, USA:, 2006.
[16] Swarat Chaudhuri, Kevin Ellis, Oleksandr Polozov, Rishabh Singh, Ar-
mando Solar-Lezama, and Yisong Yue. Neurosymbolic programming.
Found. Trends Program. Lang., 7(3):158–243, 2021.
[17] Gabriele Ciravegna, Pietro Barbiero, Francesco Giannini, Marco Gori,
PietroLiò, MarcoMaggini, andStefanoMelacci. Logicexplainednetworks.
Artif. Intell., 314:103822, 2023.
[18] William W. Cohen, Fan Yang, and Kathryn Mazaitis. Tensorlog: Deep
learning meets probabilistic dbs. CoRR, abs/1707.05390, 2017.
[19] AndrewCropper. Playgol: Learningprogramsthroughplay. InSaritKraus,
editor,28thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,IJCAI
2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pages 6074–6080. ijcai.org, 2019.
[20] Andrew Cropper and Stephen H. Muggleton. Metagol system.
https://github.com/metagol/metagol, 2016.
[21] James Cussens. Parameter estimation in stochastic logic programs. Mach.
Learn., 44(3):245–271, 2001.
[22] Wang-Zhou Dai, Qiu-Ling Xu, Yang Yu, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Bridg-
ing machine learning and logical reasoning by abductive learning. In
Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-
Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
44
Information Processing Systems 32, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages 2811–2822, 2019.
[23] Adnan Darwiche. On the tractable counting of theory models and its
application to truth maintenance and belief revision. J. Appl. Non Class.
Logics, 11(1-2):11–34, 2001.
[24] Adnan Darwiche. SDD: A new canonical representation of propositional
knowledge bases. In Toby Walsh, editor, 22nd International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2011, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain,
July 16-22, 2011, pages 819–826. IJCAI/AAAI, 2011.
[25] Adnan Darwiche and Pierre Marquis. A knowledge compilation map.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 17:229–264, 2002.
[26] Tirtharaj Dash, Sharad Chitlangia, Aditya Ahuja, and Ashwin Srinivasan.
How to tell deep neural networks what we know. CoRR, abs/2107.10295,
2021.
[27] Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Pascal Hitzler, and Luís C. Lamb.
Neural-symboliclearningandreasoning(dagstuhlseminar14381). Dagstuhl
Reports, 4(9):50–84, 2014.
[28] Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Luís C. Lamb, Luciano Serafini,
Michael Spranger, and Son N. Tran. Neural-symbolic computing: An
effective methodology for principled integration of machine learning and
reasoning. FLAP, 6(4):611–632, 2019.
[29] Artur S. d’Avila Garcez and Luís C. Lamb. A connectionist computational
model for epistemic and temporal reasoning. Neural Comput., 18(7):1711–
1738, 2006.
[30] ArturS.d’AvilaGarcez,LuísC.Lamb,andDovM.Gabbay. Connectionist
modal logic: Representing modalities in neural networks. Theor. Comput.
Sci., 371(1-2):34–53, 2007.
[31] Luc De Raedt, Angelika Kimmig, and Hannu Toivonen. Problog: A proba-
bilistic prolog and its application in link discovery. In 20th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2007, Hyderabad, India,
January 6-12, 2007, pages 2462–2467, 2007.
[32] Thomas Demeester, Tim Rocktäschel, and Sebastian Riedel. Lifted rule
injection for relation embeddings. In Jian Su, Xavier Carreras, and Kevin
Duh, editors, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2016, Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016,pages
1389–1399. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
[33] Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, and Claudio Saccà. Semantic-based
regularization for learning and inference. Artif. Intell., 244:143–165, 2017.
45
[34] Ivan Donadello, Luciano Serafini, and Artur S. d’Avila Garcez. Logic
tensor networks for semantic image interpretation. In Carles Sierra, editor,
26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2017,
Melbourne, Australia, August 19-25, 2017, pages1596–1602.ijcai.org, 2017.
[35] Honghua Dong, Jiayuan Mao, Tian Lin, Chong Wang, Lihong Li, and
Denny Zhou. Neural logic machines. In 7th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9,
2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
[36] Sebastijan Dumancic, Tias Guns, Wannes Meert, and Hendrik Blockeel.
Learning relational representations with auto-encoding logic programs.
In Sarit Kraus, editor, 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pages 6081–
6087. ijcai.org, 2019.
[37] Kevin Ellis, Lucas Morales, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Armando Solar-Lezama,
and Josh Tenenbaum. Learning libraries of subroutines for neurally-guided
bayesian program induction. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo
Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS
2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pages 7816–7826, 2018.
[38] Kevin Ellis, Maxwell I. Nye, Yewen Pu, Felix Sosa, Josh Tenenbaum, and
Armando Solar-Lezama. Write, execute, assess: Program synthesis with a
REPL. CoRR, abs/1906.04604, 2019.
[39] Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from
noisy data. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 61:1–64, 2018.
[40] Marc Fischer, Mislav Balunovic, Dana Drachsler-Cohen, Timon Gehr,
Ce Zhang, and Martin T. Vechev. DL2: training and querying neural
networks with logic. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
editors, 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019,
9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 1931–1941. PMLR, 2019.
[41] Peter A. Flach. Simply logical - intelligent reasoning by example. Wiley
professional computing. Wiley, 1994.
[42] Paolo Frasconi, Fabrizio Costa, Luc De Raedt, and Kurt De Grave. klog:
A language for logical and relational learning with kernels. Artif. Intell.,
217:117–143, 2014.
[43] Nir Friedman, Lise Getoor, Daphne Koller, and Avi Pfeffer. Learning
probabilisticrelationalmodels. InThomasDean,editor,16th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 99, Stockholm, Sweden,
July 31 - August 6, 1999. 2 Volumes, 1450 pages,pages1300–1309.Morgan
Kaufmann, 1999.
46
[44] L. Getoor and B. Taskar, editors. An Introduction to Statistical Relational
Learning. MIT Press, 2007.
[45] Francesco Giannini, Michelangelo Diligenti, Marco Gori, and Marco Mag-
gini. On a convex logic fragment for learning and reasoning. IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst., 27(7):1407–1416, 2019.
[46] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and
George E. Dahl. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In Doina
Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, 34th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August
2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
[47] Martin Grohe. The logic of graph neural networks. In 36th Annual
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2021, Rome,
Italy, June 29 - July 2, 2021, pages 1–17. IEEE, 2021.
[48] Shu Guo, Quan Wang, Lihong Wang, Bin Wang, and Li Guo. Jointly
embeddingknowledgegraphsandlogicalrules. InJianSu,XavierCarreras,
and Kevin Duh, editors, Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, EMNLP 2016, Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4,
2016, pages 192–202. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016.
[49] Bernd Gutmann, Angelika Kimmig, Kristian Kersting, and Luc De Raedt.
Parameterlearninginprobabilisticdatabases: Aleastsquaresapproach. In
WalterDaelemans,BartGoethals,andKatharinaMorik,editors,European
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
ECML/PKDD 2008, Antwerp, Belgium, September 15-19, 2008, Proceed-
ings, Part I, volume 5211 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
473–488. Springer, 2008.
[50] BerndGutmann,IngoThon,andLucDeRaedt.Learningtheparametersof
probabilistic logic programs from interpretations. In Dimitrios Gunopulos,
Thomas Hofmann, Donato Malerba, and Michalis Vazirgiannis, editors,
European Conference on Machine Learning, ECML PKDD 2011, Athens,
Greece, September 5-9, 2011. Proceedings, Part I, volume 6911 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 581–596. Springer, 2011.
[51] Christopher Hahn, Frederik Schmitt, Jens U. Kreber, Markus Norman
Rabe, and Bernd Finkbeiner. Teaching temporal logics to neural networks.
In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021,
Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
[52] Joseph Y. Halpern. An analysis of first-order logics of probability. Artif.
Intell., 46(3):311–350, 1990.
[53] Joseph Y. Halpern. Reasoning about uncertainty. MIT Press, 2005.
47
[54] WilliamL.Hamilton,PayalBajaj,MarinkaZitnik,DanJurafsky,andJure
Leskovec. Embeddinglogicalqueriesonknowledgegraphs. InSamyBengio,
Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-
Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal,
Canada, pages 2030–2041, 2018.
[55] Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowl-
edge in a neural network. CoRR, abs/1503.02531, 2015.
[56] Sepp Hochreiter. Toward a broad AI. Commun. ACM, 65(4):56–57, 2022.
[57] ZhitingHu,XuezheMa,ZhengzhongLiu,EduardH.Hovy,andEricP.Xing.
Harnessing deep neural networks with logic rules. In 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016, August 7-12,
2016, Berlin, Germany, Volume 1: Long Papers. The Association for
Computer Linguistics, 2016.
[58] Jiani Huang, Ziyang Li, Binghong Chen, Karan Samel, Mayur Naik,
Le Song, and Xujie Si. Scallop: From probabilistic deductive databases to
scalable differentiable reasoning. pages 25134–25145, 2021.
[59] Manfred Jaeger. Model-theoretic expressivity analysis. In Luc De Raedt,
Paolo Frasconi, Kristian Kersting, and Stephen H. Muggleton, editors,
Probabilistic Inductive Logic Programming - Theory and Applications,
volume4911ofLectureNotesinComputerScience,pages325–339.Springer,
2008.
[60] Ashwin Kalyan, Abhishek Mohta, Oleksandr Polozov, Dhruv Batra, Pra-
teekJain,andSumitGulwani. Neural-guideddeductivesearchforreal-time
program synthesis from examples. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 -
May 3, 2018. OpenReview.net, 2018.
[61] KristianKerstingandLucDeRaedt. Bayesianlogicprogramming: Theory
andtool. InL.GetoorandB.Taskar,editors,AnintroductiontoStatistical
Relational Learning. MIT Press, 2007.
[62] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. 2015.
[63] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with
graphconvolutionalnetworks. In5th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017. OpenRe-
view.net, 2017.
[64] Stanley Kok and Pedro M. Domingos. Learning the structure of markov
logic networks. In Luc De Raedt and Stefan Wrobel, editors, 22nd Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML 2005), Bonn, Germany,
48
August 7-11, 2005, volume 119 of ACM International Conference Proceed-
ing Series, pages 441–448. ACM, 2005.
[65] Stanley Kok and Pedro M. Domingos. Learning markov logic networks
using structural motifs. In Johannes Fürnkranz and Thorsten Joachims,
editors, 27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-10),
June 21-24, 2010, Haifa, Israel, pages 551–558. Omnipress, 2010.
[66] Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic Graphical Models - Princi-
ples and Techniques. MIT Press, 2009.
[67] Luís C. Lamb, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Marcelo O. R.
Prates, Pedro H. C. Avelar, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Graph neural net-
works meet neural-symbolic computing: A survey and perspective. In
ChristianBessiere,editor,29thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2020, pages 4877–4884. ijcai.org, 2020.
[68] Tao Li and Vivek Srikumar. Augmenting neural networks with first-order
logic. CoRR, abs/1906.06298, 2019.
[69] JohnW.Lloyd. Foundations of Logic Programming, 2nd Edition. Springer,
1987.
[70] DanielLowdandPedroM.Domingos. Efficientweightlearningformarkov
logic networks. In Joost N. Kok, Jacek Koronacki, Ramón López de Mán-
taras, Stan Matwin, Dunja Mladenic, and Andrzej Skowron, editors, 11th
European Conference on Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discov-
ery in Databases, PKDD 2007, Warsaw, Poland, September 17-21, 2007,
Proceedings, volume 4702 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
200–211. Springer, 2007.
[71] Jayanta Mandi, Víctor Bucarey, Maxime Mulamba Ke Tchomba, and Tias
Guns. Decision-focused learning: Through the lens of learning to rank.
In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári,
Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, editors, 39th International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
14935–14947. PMLR, 2022.
[72] Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Dumancic, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas De-
meester, and Luc De Raedt. Deepproblog: Neural probabilistic logic
programming. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kris-
tenGrauman,NicolòCesa-Bianchi,andRomanGarnett,editors,Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS 2018, December
3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pages 3753–3763, 2018.
[73] Robin Manhaeve, Giuseppe Marra, and Luc De Raedt. Approximate
inference for neural probabilistic logic programming. In Meghyn Bienvenu,
49
Gerhard Lakemeyer, and Esra Erdem, editors, 18th International Confer-
ence on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2021,
Online event, November 3-12, 2021, pages 475–486, 2021.
[74] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and
JiajunWu. Theneuro-symbolicconceptlearner: Interpretingscenes,words,
and sentences from natural supervision. In 7th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May
6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
[75] Giuseppe Marra. Bridging symbolic and subsymbolic reasoning with Mini-
Max Entropy models. PhD thesis, University of Florence, 2 2020.
[76] Giuseppe Marra, Michelangelo Diligenti, Francesco Giannini, Marco Gori,
andMarcoMaggini. Relationalneuralmachines. InGiuseppeDeGiacomo,
Alejandro Catalá, Bistra Dilkina, Michela Milano, Senén Barro, Alberto
Bugarín,andJérômeLang,editors,24th European Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, ECAI 2020, 29 August-8 September 2020, Santiago de Com-
postela, Spain, August 29 - September 8, 2020, volume 325 of Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pages 1340–1347. IOS Press, 2020.
[77] Giuseppe Marra, Francesco Giannini, Michelangelo Diligenti, and Marco
Gori. Integrating learning and reasoning with deep logic models. In
Ulf Brefeld, Élisa Fromont, Andreas Hotho, Arno J. Knobbe, Marloes H.
Maathuis, and Céline Robardet, editors, European Conference on Machine
Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, ECML PKDD 2019,
Würzburg, Germany, September 16-20, 2019, Proceedings, Part II, volume
11907 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 517–532. Springer,
2019.
[78] Giuseppe Marra and Ondrej Kuzelka. Neural markov logic networks.
In Cassio P. de Campos, Marloes H. Maathuis, and Erik Quaeghebeur,
editors, 37th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI
2021,VirtualEvent,27-30July2021,volume161ofProceedingsofMachine
Learning Research, pages 908–917. AUAI Press, 2021.
[79] Pasquale Minervini, Matko Bosnjak, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
and Edward Grefenstette. Differentiable reasoning on large knowledge
bases and natural language. In 34th Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020, pages 5182–5190.
AAAI Press, 2020.
[80] Pasquale Minervini, Thomas Demeester, Tim Rocktäschel, and Sebastian
Riedel. Adversarial sets for regularising neural link predictors. In Gal
Elidan,KristianKersting,andAlexanderT.Ihler,editors,33rd Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2017, Sydney, Australia,
August 11-15, 2017. AUAI Press, 2017.
50
[81] Pasquale Minervini, Sebastian Riedel, Pontus Stenetorp, Edward Grefen-
stette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Learning reasoning strategies in end-to-end
differentiableproving. In37th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ICML2020, 13-18July2020, VirtualEvent,volume119ofProceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 6938–6949. PMLR, 2020.
[82] EleonoraMisino,GiuseppeMarra,andEmanueleSansone. VAEL:bridging
variationalautoencodersandprobabilisticlogicprogramming. InS.Koyejo,
S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, NeurIPS 2022,
November 29 December 4, 2022, New Orleans, Luisiana, pages 4667–4679,
2022.
[83] Tom M. Mitchell. Generalization as search. Artif. Intell., 18(2):203–226,
1982.
[84] Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton,
JanEricLenssen,GauravRattan,andMartinGrohe. Weisfeilerandleman
go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks. In 33rd Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 -
February 1, 2019, pages 4602–4609. AAAI Press, 2019.
[85] StephenMuggleton. Stochasticlogicprograms. Advances in inductive logic
programming, 32, 1996.
[86] Stephen Muggleton and Luc De Raedt. Inductive logic programming:
Theory and methods. J. Log. Program., 19/20:629–679, 1994.
[87] Deepak Nathani, Jatin Chauhan, Charu Sharma, and Manohar Kaul.
Learning attention-based embeddings for relation prediction in knowledge
graphs. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and Lluís Màrquez, editors,
57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers,
pages 4710–4723. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
[88] Maximilian Nickel, Kevin Murphy, Volker Tresp, and Evgeniy Gabrilovich.
A review of relational machine learning for knowledge graphs. Proc. IEEE,
104(1):11–33, 2016.
[89] Maximilian Nickel, Volker Tresp, and Hans-Peter Kriegel. A three-way
model for collective learning on multi-relational data. In Lise Getoor
and Tobias Scheffer, editors, 28th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML 2011, Bellevue, Washington, USA, June 28 - July 2, 2011,
pages 809–816. Omnipress, 2011.
[90] MaxwellI.Nye,ArmandoSolar-Lezama,JoshTenenbaum,andBrendenM.
Lake. Learning compositional rules via neural program synthesis. In Hugo
Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
51
[91] Judea Pearl. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems - networks
of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann series in representation and
reasoning. Morgan Kaufmann, 1989.
[92] David Poole. Probabilistic horn abduction and bayesian networks. Artif.
Intell., 64(1):81–129, 1993.
[93] Meng Qu and Jian Tang. Probabilistic logic neural networks for reasoning.
In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence
d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 32, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14,
2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pages 7710–7720, 2019.
[94] Luc De Raedt. Logical and relational learning. Cognitive Technologies.
Springer, 2008.
[95] LucDeRaedt,AntonDries,IngoThon,GuyVandenBroeck,andMathias
Verbeke. Inducingprobabilisticrelationalrulesfromprobabilisticexamples.
In Qiang Yang and Michael J. Wooldridge, editors, 24th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, July 25-31, 2015, pages 1835–1843. AAAI Press, 2015.
[96] Luc De Raedt, Kristian Kersting, Sriraam Natarajan, and David Poole.
Statistical Relational Artificial Intelligence: Logic, Probability, and Compu-
tation. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning.
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2016.
[97] Luc De Raedt and Angelika Kimmig. Probabilistic (logic) programming
concepts. Mach. Learn., 100(1):5–47, 2015.
[98] LucDeRaedt,RobinManhaeve,SebastijanDumancic,ThomasDemeester,
and Angelika Kimmig. Neuro-symbolic = neural + logical + probabilistic.
In Derek Doran, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, and Freddy Lécué, editors,
InternationalWorkshoponNeural-SymbolicLearningandReasoning(NeSy
2019), Annual workshop of the Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning
Association, Macao, China, August 12, 2019, 2019.
[99] Hongyu Ren and Jure Leskovec. Beta embeddings for multi-hop logical
reasoninginknowledgegraphs. InHugoLarochelle, Marc’AurelioRanzato,
RaiaHadsell,Maria-FlorinaBalcan,andHsuan-TienLin,editors,Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, NeurIPS 2020, December
6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
[100] Matthew Richardson and Pedro M. Domingos. Markov logic networks.
Mach. Learn., 62(1-2):107–136, 2006.
[101] Ryan Riegel, Alexander G. Gray, Francois P. S. Luus, Naweed Khan,
Ndivhuwo Makondo, Ismail Yunus Akhalwaya, Haifeng Qian, Ronald
Fagin, Francisco Barahona, Udit Sharma, Shajith Ikbal, Hima Karanam,
52
SumitNeelam,AnkitaLikhyani,andSantoshK.Srivastava. Logicalneural
networks. CoRR, abs/2006.13155, 2020.
[102] Tim Rocktäschel and Sebastian Riedel. End-to-end differentiable proving.
In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach,
RobFergus,S.V.N.Vishwanathan,andRomanGarnett,editors,Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, NeurIPA 2017, December
4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 3788–3800, 2017.
[103] Tim Rocktäschel, Sameer Singh, and Sebastian Riedel. Injecting logical
background knowledge into embeddings for relation extraction. In Rada
Mihalcea, Joyce Yue Chai, and Anoop Sarkar, editors, Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL HLT 2015 , Denver,
Colorado, USA, May 31 - June 5, 2015, pages 1119–1129. The Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2015.
[104] StuartJ.Russell. Unifyinglogicandprobability. Commun.ACM,58(7):88–
97, 2015.
[105] Taisuke Sato. A statistical learning method for logic programs with distri-
bution semantics. In Leon Sterling, editor, 12nd International Conference
on Logic Programming, Tokyo, Japan, June 13-16, 1995, pages 715–729.
MIT Press, 1995.
[106] Taisuke Sato and Yoshitaka Kameya. PRISM: A language for symbolic-
statistical modeling. In 15th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, IJCAI 97, Nagoya, Japan, August 23-29, 1997, 2 Volumes,
pages 1330–1339. Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
[107] Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and
Gabriele Monfardini. The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions
on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
[108] Michael Sejr Schlichtkrull, Thomas N. Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den
Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max Welling. Modeling relational data with graph
convolutional networks. In Aldo Gangemi, Roberto Navigli, Maria-Esther
Vidal, Pascal Hitzler, Raphaël Troncy, Laura Hollink, Anna Tordai, and
Mehwish Alam, editors, 15th International Conference on the The Se-
mantic Web, ESWC 2018, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, June 3-7, 2018,
Proceedings, volume 10843 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
593–607. Springer, 2018.
[109] Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Gal-
lagher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad. Collective classification in network data. AI
Mag., 29(3):93–106, 2008.
[110] Chao Shang, Yun Tang, Jing Huang, Jinbo Bi, Xiaodong He, and Bowen
Zhou. End-to-end structure-aware convolutional networks for knowledge
53
basecompletion. In33rd Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2019,
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27 - February 1, 2019, pages 3060–3067.
AAAI Press, 2019.
[111] Hikaru Shindo, Viktor Pfanschilling, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian
Kersting. αILP: thinking visual scenes as differentiable logic programs.
Mach. Learn., 112(5):1465–1497, 2023.
[112] Xujie Si, Mukund Raghothaman, Kihong Heo, and Mayur Naik. Synthe-
sizing datalog programs using numerical relaxation. In Sarit Kraus, editor,
28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019,
Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pages 6117–6124. ijcai.org, 2019.
[113] ArsenySkryagin,WolfgangStammer,DanielOchs,DevendraSinghDhami,
and Kristian Kersting. Neural-probabilistic answer set programming. In
Gabriele Kern-Isberner, Gerhard Lakemeyer, and Thomas Meyer, editors,
19th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning, KR 2022, Haifa, Israel, July 31 - August 5, 2022, 2022.
[114] Arseny Skryagin, Karl Stelzner, Alejandro Molina, Fabrizio Ventola,
Zhongjie Yu, and Kristian Kersting. Sum-product logic: integrating
probabilistic circuits into deepproblog. 2020.
[115] Lennert De Smet, Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires, Robin Manhaeve,
Giuseppe Marra, Angelika Kimmig, and Luc De Raedt. Neural prob-
abilistic logic programming in discrete-continuous domains. In Robin J.
Evans and Ilya Shpitser, editors, Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
UAI 2023, July 31 - 4 August 2023, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, volume 216 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 529–538. PMLR, 2023.
[116] Gustav Sourek, Vojtech Aschenbrenner, Filip Zelezný, Steven Schockaert,
and Ondrej Kuzelka. Lifted relational neural networks: Efficient learning
of latent relational structures. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 62:69–100, 2018.
[117] Gustav Sourek, Filip Zelezný, and Ondrej Kuzelka. Beyond graph neural
networkswithliftedrelationalneuralnetworks. Mach. Learn.,110(7):1695–
1738, 2021.
[118] Naoya Takeishi and Kosuke Akimoto. Knowledge-based distant regulariza-
tion in learning probabilistic models. CoRR, abs/1806.11332, 2018.
[119] GeoffreyG.TowellandJudeW.Shavlik. Knowledge-basedartificialneural
networks. Artif. Intell., 70(1-2):119–165, 1994.
[120] Théo Trouillon, Johannes Welbl, Sebastian Riedel, Éric Gaussier, and
Guillaume Bouchard. Complex embeddings for simple link prediction. In
Maria-Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, 33nd Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2016, New York City, NY,
USA, June 19-24, 2016, volume 48 of JMLR Workshop and Conference
Proceedings, pages 2071–2080. JMLR.org, 2016.
54
[121] Efthymia Tsamoura, Timothy M. Hospedales, and Loizos Michael. Neural-
symbolic integration: A compositional perspective. In 35th Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021,
pages 5051–5060. AAAI Press, 2021.
[122] Lazar Valkov, Dipak Chaudhari, Akash Srivastava, Charles Sutton, and
Swarat Chaudhuri. HOUDINI: lifelong learning as program synthesis. In
Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman,
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018,
Montréal, Canada, pages 8701–8712, 2018.
[123] Michael van Bekkum, Maaike de Boer, Frank van Harmelen, André Meyer-
Vitali, and Annette ten Teije. Modular design patterns for hybrid learning
and reasoning systems. Appl. Intell., 51(9):6528–6546, 2021.
[124] Emile van Krieken, Erman Acar, and Frank van Harmelen. Analyzing
differentiable fuzzy logic operators. Artif. Intell., 302:103602, 2022.
[125] Moshe Y. Vardi. Why is modal logic so robustly decidable? In Neil
Immerman and Phokion G. Kolaitis, editors, Descriptive Complexity and
Finite Models, DIMACS Workshop 1996, Princeton, New Jersey, USA,
January14-17,1996,volume31ofDIMACSSeriesinDiscreteMathematics
and Theoretical Computer Science, pages 149–183. DIMACS/AMS, 1996.
[126] Shikhar Vashishth, Soumya Sanyal, Vikram Nitin, and Partha P. Talukdar.
Composition-based multi-relational graph convolutional networks. In 8th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
[127] Po-Wei Wang, Priya L. Donti, Bryan Wilder, and J. Zico Kolter. Sat-
net: Bridging deep learning and logical reasoning using a differentiable
satisfiability solver. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
editors, 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019,
9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 6545–6554. PMLR, 2019.
[128] Quan Wang, Zhendong Mao, Bin Wang, and Li Guo. Knowledge graph
embedding: A survey of approaches and applications. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., 29(12):2724–2743, 2017.
[129] Wenya Wang and Sinno Jialin Pan. Integrating deep learning with logic
fusion for information extraction. pages 9225–9232, 2020.
[130] Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. Knowledge
graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. In Carla E. Brodley and
Peter Stone, editors, 28th Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI
2014, July 27 -31, 2014, Québec City, Québec, Canada, pages 1112–1119.
AAAI Press, 2014.
55
[131] Leon Weber, Pasquale Minervini, Jannes Münchmeyer, Ulf Leser, and
Tim Rocktäschel. Nlprolog: Reasoning with weak unification for question
answering in natural language. In Anna Korhonen, David R. Traum, and
Lluís Màrquez, editors, 57th Conference of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019,
Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 6151–6161. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019.
[132] Thomas Winters, Giuseppe Marra, Robin Manhaeve, and Luc De Raedt.
Deepstochlog: Neural stochastic logic programming. In 36th Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, Virtual Event, February 22 - March
1, 2022, pages 10090–10100. AAAI Press, 2022.
[133] JingyiXu,ZiluZhang,TalFriedman,YitaoLiang,andGuyVandenBroeck.
A semantic loss function for deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In
JenniferG.DyandAndreasKrause,editors,35th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden,
July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 5498–5507. PMLR, 2018.
[134] KeyuluXu,WeihuaHu,JureLeskovec,andStefanieJegelka. Howpowerful
are graph neural networks? In 7th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
OpenReview.net, 2019.
[135] XiaoranXu,WeiFeng,YunshengJiang,XiaohuiXie,ZhiqingSun,andZhi-
Hong Deng. Dynamically pruned message passing networks for large-scale
knowledge graph reasoning. In 8th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.
OpenReview.net, 2020.
[136] Bishan Yang, Wen-tau Yih, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, and Li Deng.
Embedding entities and relations for learning and inference in knowledge
bases. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 3rd International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA,
USA, May 7-9, 2015, 2015.
[137] Fan Yang, Zhilin Yang, and William W. Cohen. Differentiable learning of
logical rules for knowledge base reasoning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vish-
wanathan, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30, NeurIPS 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach,
CA, USA, pages 2319–2328, 2017.
[138] Zhun Yang, Adam Ishay, and Joohyung Lee. Neurasp: Embracing neural
networks into answer set programming. In Christian Bessiere, editor,
29th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2020,
pages 1755–1762. ijcai.org, 2020.
56
[139] Lotfi A Zadeh. Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning. Synthese, 30(3-
4):407–428, 1975.
[140] Lisa Zhang, Gregory Rosenblatt, Ethan Fetaya, Renjie Liao, William E.
Byrd, Matthew Might, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard S. Zemel. Neural
guided constraint logic programming for program synthesis. In Samy
Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen Grauman, Nicolò
Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal,
Canada, pages 1744–1753, 2018.
[141] Muhan Zhang and Yixin Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural
networks. In Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Kristen
Grauman, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Roman Garnett, editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 31, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8,
2018, Montréal, Canada, pages 5171–5181, 2018.
[142] Yuyu Zhang, Xinshi Chen, Yuan Yang, Arun Ramamurthy, Bo Li, Yuan
Qi, and Le Song. Efficient probabilistic logic reasoning with graph neural
networks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net,
2020.
[143] Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires, Vincent Derkinderen, Robin Manhaeve,
Wannes Meert, Angelika Kimmig, and Luc De Raedt. Transforming
probabilistic programs into algebraic circuits for inference and learning. In
Program Transformations for ML Workshop at NeurIPS, 2019.
Appendix A. Knowledge graphs embeddings and Graph Neural Net-
works for neurosymbolic AI
In this appendix, we introduce two approaches, namely Knowledge Graph
EmbeddingsandGraphNeuralNetworks,whicharecommonlyusedinrelational
tasksinthedeeplearningcommunity. Weanalyzetheminthespiritoftheseven
dimensions introduced in the paper. In fact, it turns out that they share many
features with neurosymbolic systems. In this way, we would like to suggest that
NeSy can also be found at the intersection of statistical relational and geometric
deep learning approaches.
One of the most popular relational representations is that of a knowledge
graph (KG). A KG is a multi-relational graph composed of entities (i.e. nodes)
and relations (i.e. edges). It is common to represent an edge as a triple of the
form: (head entity, relation, tail entity), e.g. (homer, fatherOf, bart).
StarAI has been extensively used [88] to solve many tasks on KGs: predic-
tion of missing relationships (i.e. knowledge graph completion), prediction of
properties of entities, or clustering entities based on their connectivity patterns.
StarAI is particularly well suited to reasoning with knowledge graphs since it
models explicitly the probabilistic dependencies among different relationships.
57
However, in order to scale to larger knowledge graphs, the probabilistic
dependencies of StarAI models have been relaxed to give rise to a new class of
scalable models based on latent features, which are particularly interesting from
a neurosymbolic viewpoint. The key intuition behind relational latent feature
modelsisthattherelationshipsbetweenentitiescanbemoreefficientlypredicted
by modeling simpler interactions in a latent feature space. Knowledge Graph
Embeddings and Graph Neural Networks represent two of the ways to encode
such latent representations.
Appendix A.1. Knowledge Graph Embeddings
Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) models [128] assume that triples (i.e.
relations) are conditionally independent given a set of global latent variables,
called embeddings, for entities and relations. Therefore, the existence of a triple
can be predicted by a scoring function f(e ,e ,e ), where e is the embedding
h r t i
of the corresponding object.
KGEmodelsmainlydifferintermsofthescoringfunctionandtheembedding
space they use. Translation or distance-based models [13, 130] use a scoring
functionmeasuringtowhatextentthetailofatriplecanbeobtainedbyarelation-
specific translation of the head, i.e. f(e ,e ,e ) = ||e +e −e ||. Semantic
h r t h r t
matching methods [89] instead exploit similarity-based scoring functions, such
as f(e ,W ,e )=||e W e⊤||. It is interesting to note that standard multi-layer
h r t h r t
perceptrons are often used to learn this similarity measure, i.e. f(e ,W ,e )=
h r t
nn([e ,e ];W ). This is similar to neural interfaces typical of lPN and LpN
h t r
models of Section 7, cf. the neural predicates of DeepProbLog in Example 13.
KGE learn from ground relations only. They learn the embeddings of entities
and relations as to maximize the score for a set of known True triples. However,
somemethodsincorporatehigherlevelinformation,likefirst-orderlogicalclauses
[48, 32] or logical queries [54, 99], bridging KGE and multiple NeSy systems
(like SL[133] or SBR[33]).
It is interesting to analyze KGE methods in terms of the dimensions we
described in our paper. KGE methods mostly work as model-based, undirected
methods. They constrain the embeddings to be coherent with the logical facts
and rules, which are no longer used after learning. They are heavily based on
subsymbolic representations. These models learn the correct parameters (i.e.
embeddings) for the task at hand. Even if no explicit semantics needs to be
given to the scoring function f(e ,W ,e ), a fuzzy logic interpretation is often
h r t
used when injecting logical rules [48, 32]
Appendix A.2. Graph Neural Networks
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) ([107, 134]) are deep learning models for
dealing with graphs as input. Inference in these models can be cast as message
passing [46, 8]: at each inference step (i.e. GNN layer), a node sends a message
toallitsoutgoingneighborsandupdatesitsstatebyaggregatingallthemessages
coming from its ingoing neighbors. Messages are computed by standard neural
networks. Each inference step computes a transformation of the representations
58
of the nodes. In the last layer, these representations are used to classify the
nodes or are aggregated to classify the entire graph.
There are many connections between GNNs and neurosymbolic computation
[67] since both of them apply neural methods to relational data: graphs for
GNNs, and logic representations for NeSy. While many works try to close the
gap between these two representations [42], the application of GNN techniques
to logic-based graph structures is still very limited. The most related line of
work is about using GNNs on knowledge graphs [141, 108, 110, 135, 87, 126].
The underlying idea is to differentiate the messages exchanged by two nodes if
they are related by different kinds of edges. For example, given two nodes homer
and bart, the message corresponding to the edge fatherOf(homer,bart) will
be different from the one corresponding to sameFamily(homer,bart). However,
these models were intended as classifiers of known relational structures (nodes
and edges) and not to reason about the knowledge graph itself (e.g. determining
whether an edge exists between two nodes). To perform relational reasoning,
GNN-based models rely on techniques from the KGE community on top of
the representations extracted by the GNN. This often takes the shape of an
auto-encoding scheme: a GNN encodes an input graph in a latent representation
and a KGE-based factorization technique is used to reconstruct the whole graph
[108].
An important characteristic of GNNs is that they rely exclusively on neural
computation to perform inference (i.e. to compute messages) and there is no
clear direction on how to inject external knowledge about inference, e.g. as
logical rules. This contrasts with NeSy, where this is one of the main goals.
There are also some interesting connections between GNNs and StarAI
models. In [93, 142], GNNs based on knowledge-graphs are not used as a
modeling choice but rather to approximate inference in Markov Logic Networks,
which is somewhat similar to regularization based methods (see Section 2).
Similarly, in [1] GNNs are used to encode logical formulae expressed as graphs
to approximate a weighted model counting problem.
Finally,itisinterestingtoanalyseGNNsinthespiritofsomeofthedimensions
ofNeSy. GNNsactasdirectedmodelswithaproof-basedinferencescheme: they
perform a series of inference steps to compute the final answer. In the original
version of GNNs [107], the node states are updated until a fixed point is reached,
which resembles forward-chaining in logic programming. The representation
of nodes belongs to a subsymbolic numerical space. Finally, GNNs can be
considered as implicit structure learners: inference rules are learned through the
learning of the neural message passing functions.
Graph Neural Networks have recently received a lot of attention from many
different communities, thanks to the representation power of neural networks
and the capability of learning in complex relational settings. It is no surprise
that people have started to study the expressivity of this class of models. One of
the most interesting analyses from a neurosymbolic viewpoint is measuring the
expressivity of GNNs in terms of variable counting logics. Recently, [84, 7, 47]
showed that GNNs are as expressive as 2-variable counting logic C . This
2
fragmentoffirstorderlogicadmitsformulaswithatmosttwovariablesextended
59
with counting quantifiers. The expressivity of this fragment is limited compared
to many neurosymbolic models, especially those based on logic. However, GNNs
learn the logical structure of the problem implicitly as part of the message
passing learning scheme and they rely neither on expert-provided knowledge nor
on heavy combinatorial search strategies to structure learning (see Section 5).
An open and challenging question that unites the GNN and NeSy communities
is how to bring the expressivity to higher-order fragments [84], like in NeSy
and StarAI, while keeping both the learning and the inference tractable, like in
GNNs.
Appendix B. Fuzzy logic, fuzzyfication and soft-Satisfability
Fuzzy logic, as many-valued extension over Boolean logic, has a very long
tradition [139, 9]. However, the use of fuzzy logic in StarAI and NeSy is
not dictated by the need of dealing with vagueness, but by the advantageous
computational properties of t-norms. Indeed, a common use case is to have an
initialtheorydefinedinBooleanlogicwhichisfuzzyfied. Inferenceisthencarried
out with the fuzzyfied theory and the answers are eventually discretized back to
Boolean values (usually using a threshold at 0.5).
The reason for this approach is that one would like to exploit the differ-
entiability of t-norms to address logical inference of FOL theories in a more
scalable way than standard combinatorial optimization algorithms (e.g. SAT
solvers). This is particularly important in undirected and regularization-based
methods(suchasPSL[3]andLTN[5]). Infact,ithasbeenshown[45]thatthere
are fragments of fuzzy logic that can even provide convex inference problems.
Example 23, however, shows that naively approaching logical inference through
a fuzzy relaxation and gradient-based optimization can introduce unexpected
behaviours.
Example 23: Fuzzyfication and soft-Satisfability
Let us consider a disjunction, like A∨B∨C. In Boolean logic, if we state
thatthedisjunctionissatisfied (i.e. True),thenweexpectatleastoneamong
the three variables to be True.
Suppose we want to find a truth assignment for all the variables that satisfies
thedisjunctionabove. TheapproachofthemajorityofNeSyfuzzyapproaches
is the following. First, the rule is relaxed into a fuzzy real function. For
example, using the Łukasiewicz t-norm, F (A,B,C)=min(1,A+B+C).
⊕
Secondly, a gradient-based algorithm (e.g. backpropagation with Adam [62])
is used to maximize the value of the formula with respect to the fuzzy truth
degree of the three variables. Finally, the obtained fuzzy solution A⋆,B⋆,C⋆
is translated back into a Boolean assignment using a 0.5 threshold.
Let us consider a possible optimal fuzzy solution, like (A⋆,B⋆,C⋆) =
(0.34,0.34,0.34) and its discretized version (A⋆,B⋆,C⋆) = (False,False,
False), using a threshold at 0.5. The discretized solution does not satisfy the
initial Boolean formula, even though it is a global optimum in the fuzzyfied
60
problem.
Similarly,[124]showsthat,whileitisverycommontoreasonaboutuniversally
quantified formulae in the form of ∀x : A(x) → B(x), like ‘all humans are
mortal’, using gradients and fuzzy logic to make inference can be extremely
counterintuitive, especially with specific t-norms such as the product t-norm.
It is unclear whether there exists a generally accepted subset of properties of
Boolean logic that one wants to preserve and whether one can define a t-norm
that guarantees such properties.
Appendix B.1. Distribution semantics and fuzzy logic semantics
Another common reason for using fuzzy logic is to exploit a differentiable
semantics. Then, gradient-based methods can be used to train the parameters
of a weighted logical theory such as in LRNNs [116]. This contrasts with
gradient-based training of the parameters of probabilistic logics based on the
distribution semantics. Possible worlds in probabilistic logic are defined as
possible assignments of truth values to all the ground atoms of a logical theory.
The assignments of truth values specify the semantics of the logic. On the
contrary, fuzzy logic assigns continuous truth degrees to formulas or proofs,
which are syntactic structures. As a consequence, while the probability of an
atom will always be equal to the sum of the probabilities of the worlds in which
it is True (cf. Equation 1), the fuzzy degree of an atom may vary depending on
how that atom has been proven or defined, as shown in Example 24.
Example 24: Distribution semantics vs fuzzy logic semantics
Consider the following annotated program (adapted from [21]).
0.3::b.
a1 <- b.
a2 <- b,b.
Here, 0.3 is the label of b without any particular semantics yet. Given the
idempotency of the Boolean conjunction, we would expect the scores of both
a1anda2tobeidenticalsincebothbandb∧bareTrue whenbisTrue. Ina
probabilisticapproach,thescoreisinterpretedasaprobability,i.e. p(b)=0.3.
The probability of any atom is the sum of the probabilities of all the worlds
where that atom is True. It is easy to see that, for both a1 and a2, these are
the worlds where b is True, thus p(a1)=p(a2)=p(b)=0.3. On the other
hand, in the fuzzy setting, the score of b is interpreted as its truth degree,
i.e. t(b)=0.3. Let us consider the product t-norm, where t(x∧y)=t(x)t(y),
then t(a1)=t(b)=0.3 while t(a2)=t(b)t(b)=0.09. While this issue could
be solved by choosing a different t-norm (e.g. the minimum t-norm), similar
issues arise in different definitions.
The differences between the two semantics are not due to the probabilistic
or the fuzzy semantics, but more to the distinction between semantics based
61
on possible worlds and semantics based on proofs or derivations. In fact, a
similar behaviour is observed in Stochastic Logic Programs [21] under the name
of memoization.
62
