Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural
Networks for Document Classification
Jader Abreu(cid:63), Luis Fred(cid:63), David Macˆedo, and Cleber Zanchettin
Centro de Informa´tica
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
50.740-560, Recife, PE, Brazil
{jaoa,lfgs,dlm,cz}@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract. Documentclassificationisachallengingtaskwithimportant
applications. The deep learning approaches to the problem have gained
much attention recently. Despite the progress, the proposed models do
notincorporatetheknowledgeofthedocumentstructureinthearchitec-
ture efficiently and not take into account the contexting importance of
wordsandsentences.Inthispaper,weproposeanewapproachbasedon
a combination of convolutional neural networks, gated recurrent units,
and attention mechanisms for document classification tasks. The main
contributionofthisworkistheuseofconvolutionlayerstoextractmore
meaningful, generalizable and abstract features by the hierarchical rep-
resentation. The proposed method in this paper improves the results of
the current attention-based approaches.
Keywords: Textclassification·Attentionmechanisms·Documentclas-
sification · Convolutional Neural Networks.
1 Introduction
Text classification is one of the most classical and important tasks in the ma-
chine learning field. The document classification, which is essential to organize
documents for retrieval, analysis, and curation, is traditionally performed by
classifiers such as Support Vector Machines or Random Forests. As in different
areas, the deep learning methods are presenting a performance quite superior
to traditional approaches in this field [5]. Deep learning is also playing a central
role in Natural Language Processing (NLP) through learned word vector repre-
sentations. It aims to represent words in terms of fixed-length, continuous and
densefeaturevectors,capturingsemanticwordrelations:similarwordsareclose
to each other in the vector space.
In most NLP tasks for document classification, the proposed models do not
incorporate the knowledge of the document structure in the architecture effi-
ciently and not take into account the contexting importance of words and sen-
tences. Much of these approaches do not select qualitative or informative words
(cid:63) Authors contributed equally and are both first authors.
9102
nuJ
82
]LC.sc[
2v01660.1091:viXra
2 Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.
and sentences since some words are more informative than others in a docu-
ment.Moreover,thesemodelsarefrequentlybasedonrecurrentneuralnetworks
only [6]. Since CNN has leveraged strong performance on deep learning models
by extracting more abundant features and reducing the number of parameters,
we guess it not only improves computational performance but also yields better
generalization on neural models for document classification.
ArecenttrendinNLPistouseattentionalmechanismstomodelinginforma-
tion dependencies without regard to their distance between words in the input
sequences. In [6] is proposed a hierarchical neural architecture for document
classification, which employs attentional mechanisms, trying to mirror the hier-
archical structure of the document. The intuition underlying the model is that
not all parts of a text are equally relevant to represent it. Further, determining
the relevant sections involves modeling the interactions and importance among
the words and not just their presence in the text.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for document classification based
on CNN, GRU [4] hidden units and attentional mechanisms to improve the
model performance by selectively focusing the network on essential parts of the
text sentences during the model training. Inspired by [6], we have used the hi-
erarchical concept to better representation of document structure. We call our
model as Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural Networks (HAHNN). We also
used temporal convolutions [2], which give us more flexible receptive field sizes.
We evaluate the proposed approach comparing its results with state-of-the-art
models and the model shows an improved accuracy.
2 Hierarchical Attentional Hybrid Neural Networks
The HAHNN model combines convolutional layers, Gated Recurrent Units, and
attention mechanisms. Figure 1 shows the proposed architecture. The first layer
of HAHNN is a pre-processed word embedding layer (black circles in the Fig-
ure 1). The second layer contains a stack of CNN layers that consist of con-
volutional layers with multiple filters (varying window sizes) and feature maps.
We also have performed some trials with temporal convolutional layers with di-
lated convolutions and gotten promising results. Besides, we used Dropout for
regularization. In the next layers, we use a word encoder applying the attention
mechanism on word level context vector. In sequence, a sentence encoder apply-
ingtheattentiononsentence-levelcontextvector.ThelastlayerusesaSoftmax
function to generate the output probability distribution over the classes.
WeuseCNNtoextractmoremeaningful,generalizableandabstractfeatures
by the hierarchical representation. Combining convolutional layers in different
filtersizeswithbothwordandsentenceencoderinahierarchicalarchitecturelet
ourmodelextractmorerichfeaturesandimprovesgeneralizationperformancein
documentclassification.Toobtainrepresentationsofmorerarewords,bytaking
intoaccountsubwordsinformation,weusedFastText[3]inthewordembedding
initialization.
Weinvestigatetwovariantsoftheproposedarchitecture.Thereisabasicver-
sion,asdescribedinFigure1,andthereisanotherwhichimplementsaTCN[2]
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3
layer. The goal is to simulate RNNs with very long memory size by adopting a
combination of dilated and regular convolutions with residual connections. Di-
lated convolutions are considered beneficial in longer sequences as they enable
anexponentiallylargerreceptivefieldinconvolutionallayers.Moreformally,for
a 1-D sequence input x∈Rn and a filter f : {0,...,k −1} → R, the dilated
convolution operation F on element s of the sequence is defined as
k−1
(cid:88)
F(s)=(x∗ f)(s)= f(i)·x (1)
d s−d·i
i=o
where d is the dilatation factor, k is the filter size, and s −d ·i accounts for
thepastinformationdirection.Dilationisthus equivalenttointroducinga fixed
step between every two adjacent filter maps. When d = 1, a dilated convolution
reduces to a regular convolution. The use of larger dilation enables an output
atthetopleveltorepresentawiderrangeofinputs,expandingthereceptivefield.
Fig.1: Our HAHNN Architecture include an CNN layer after the embedding
layer. In addition, we have created a variant which includes a temporal convo-
lutional layer [2] after the embedding layer.
The proposed model takes into account that the different parts of a docu-
ment have no similar relevant information. Moreover, determining the relevant
sections involves modeling the interactions among the words, not just their iso-
latedpresenceinthetext.Therefore,toconsiderthisaspect,themodelincludes
twolevelsofattentionmechanisms[1].Onestructureatthewordlevelandother
atthesentencelevel,whichletthemodelpaymoreorlessattentiontoindividual
words and sentences when constructing the document representation.
4 Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.
The strategy consists of different parts: 1) A word sequence encoder and
a word-level attention layer; and 2) A sentence encoder and a sentence-level
attention layer. In the word encoder, the model uses bidirectional GRU [1] to
produceannotationsofwordsbysummarizinginformationfrombothdirections.
Therefore, it incorporates the contextual information in the annotation. The
attentionlevelsletthemodelpaymoreorlessattentiontoindividualwordsand
sentences when constructing the representation of the document [6].
Given a sentence with words w ,t ∈ [0,T] and an embedding matrix W ,
it e
→−
a bidirectional GRU contains the forward GRU f which reads the sentence s
←− i
from w to w and a backward GRU f which reads from w to w :
i1 iT iT i1
−→ −−−→
x =W w ,t ∈[1,T], (2) h =GRU(x ),t ∈[1,T], (3)
it e it it it
←− ←−−−
h =GRU(x ),t ∈[T,1]. (4)
it it
Anannotationforagivenwordw isobtainedbyconcatenatingtheforward
it −→ ←−
hidden state and backward hidden state, i.e., h = [h ,h ], which summarizes
it it it
the information of the whole sentence. We use the attention mechanism to eval-
uateswordsthatareimportanttothemeaningofthesentenceandtoaggregate
therepresentationofthoseinformativewordsintoasentencevector.Specifically,
u it =tanh(W w h it +b w ) (5) α = exp(u(cid:62) it u w ) (6)
it (cid:80) exp(u(cid:62)u )
(cid:88) t it w
s = α h (7)
i it it
The model measures the importance of a word as the similarity of u with
it
a word level context vector u and learns a normalized importance weight α
w it
through a softmax function. After that, the architecture computes the sentence
vector s as a weighted sum of the word annotations based on the weights. The
i
word context vector u is randomly initialized and jointly learned during the
w
training process.
Given the sentence vectors s , and the document vector, the sentence atten-
i
tion is obtained as:
−→ −−−→ ←− ←−−−
h =GRU(s ),i ∈[1,L], (8) h =GRU(s ),i ∈[L,1]. (9)
it i it i
→− ←−
The proposed solution concatenates h = [h ,h ] h which summarizes the
i i i i
neighbor sentences around sentence i but still focus on sentence i. To reward
sentences that are relevant to correctly classify a document, the solution again
use attention mechanism and introduce a sentence level context vector u using
s
it to measure the importance of the sentences:
u it =tanh(W s h i +b s ) (10) α = exp(u(cid:62) i u s ) (11)
it (cid:80) exp(u(cid:62)u )
i i s
(cid:88)
v = α h (12)
i i
In the above equation, v is the document vector that summarizes all the in-
formationofsentencesinadocument.Similarly,thesentencelevelcontextvector
u can be randomly initialized and jointly learned during the training process.
s
Theoutputofthesentenceattentionlayerfeedsafullyconnectedsoftmaxlayer.
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5
It gives us a probability distribution over the classes. The proposed method is
openly available in the github repository 1.
3 Experiments and Results
We evaluate the proposed model on two document classification datasets using
90% of the data for training and the remaining 10% for tests. We split docu-
ments into sentences and tokenize each sentence. The word embeddings have
dimension 200 and we use Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. The
datasets used are the IMDb Movie Reviews 2 and Yelp 2018 3. The former con-
tains a set of 25k highly polar movie reviews for training and 25k for testing,
whereas the classification involves detecting positive/negative reviews. The lat-
ter include users ratings and write reviews about stores and services on Yelp,
being a dataset for multiclass classification (ratings from 0-5 stars). Yelp 2018
containsaround5Mfullreviewtextdata,butwefixin500kthenumberofused
samples for computational purposes.
Table 1: Results in classification accuracies.
Method Accuracy on test set
Yelp 2018 (five classes) IMDb (two classes)
VDNN [7] 62.14 79.47
HN-ATT [6] 72.73 89.02
CNN [5] 71.81 91.34
Our model with CNN 73.28 92.26
Our model with TCN 72.63 95.17
Table 1 shows the experiment results comparing our results with related
works. Note that HN-ATT [6] obtained an accuracy of 72,73% in the Yelp test
set, whereas the proposed model obtained an accuracy of 73,28%. Our results
also outperformed CNN [6] and VDNN [7]. We can see an improvement of the
resultsinYelpwithourapproachusingCNNandvaryingwindowsizesinfilters.
The model also performs better in the results with IMDb using both CNN and
TCN.
3.1 Attention Weights Visualizations
Tovalidatethemodelperformanceinselectinformativewordsandsentences,we
present the visualizations of attention weights in Figure 2. There is an example
of the attention visualizations for a positive and negative class in test reviews.
Everylineisasentence.Bluecolordenotesthesentenceweight,andreddenotes
the word weight in determining the sentence meaning. There is a greater focus
on more important features despite some exceptions. For example, the word
“loving” and “amazed” in Figure 2 (a) and “disappointment” in Figure 2 (b).
1 https://github.com/luisfredgs/cnn-hierarchical-network-for-document-classification
2 http://ai.stanford.edu/ amaas/data/sentiment/
3 https://www.yelp.com/dataset/challenge
6 Abreu, J., Fred, L., et al.
(a) A positive example of visualization of a strong word in the sentence.
(b) A negative example of visualization of a strong word in the sentence.
Fig.2: Visualization of attention weights computed by the proposed model
Occasionally,wehavefoundissuesinsomesentences,wherefewerimportant
words are getting higher importance. For example, in Figure 2 (a) notes that
the word “translate” has received high importance even though it represents a
neutral word. These drawbacks will be taken into account in future works.
4 Final Remarks
In this paper, we have presented the HAHNN architecture for document classi-
fication. The method combines CNN with attention mechanisms in both word
and sentence level. HAHNN improves accuracy in document classification by
incorporate the document structure in the model and employing CNN’s for the
extraction of more abundant features.
References
1. BAHDANAU, Dzmitry; CHO, Kyunghyun; BENGIO, Yoshua. Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
2. BAI, Shaojie; KOLTER, J. Zico; KOLTUN, Vladlen. An empirical evaluation of
genericconvolutionalandrecurrentnetworksforsequencemodeling.arXivpreprint
arXiv:1803.01271, 2018.
3. BOJANOWSKI, Piotr et al. Enriching word vectors with subword information.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606, 2016.
4. CHO, Kyunghyun et al. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014.
5. KIM,Yoon.Convolutionalneuralnetworksforsentenceclassification.arXivpreprint
arXiv:1408.5882, 2014.
6. YANG, Zichao et al. Hierarchical attention networks for document classification.
In:Conf.NorthAm.ChapteroftheAssoc.forComp.Ling.2016.p.1480-1489,San
Diego, CA, USA.
7. Conneau, Alexis, et al. ”Very deep convolutional networks for text classification.”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01781 (2016).
