5102
luJ
12
]LP.sc[
1v26750.7051:viXra
ToAppearinTheoryandPracticeofLogicProgramming (TPLP),ProceedingsofICLP2015 1
Horn Clauses as an Intermediate Representation
for Program Analysis and Transformation∗
GRAEME GANGE
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia
(e-mail: gkgange@unimelb.edu.au)
JORGE A. NAVAS
NASA Ames Research Center, Moffet Field CA
(e-mail: jorge.a.navaslaserna@nasa.gov)
PETER SCHACHTE, HARALD SØNDERGAARD, PETER J. STUCKEY
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia
(e-mail: {schachte,harald,pstuckey}@unimelb.edu.au)
Abstract
Many recent analyses for conventional imperative programs begin by transforming programs
intologic programs, capitalising on existing LPanalyses and simple LP semantics. Wepropose
using logic programs as an intermediate program representation throughout the compilation
process. With restrictions ensuring determinism and single-modedness, a logic program can
easily be transformed to machine language or other low-level language, while maintaining the
simplesemanticsthatmakesit suitableasalanguage forprogram analysisandtransformation.
We present a simple LP language that enforces determinism and single-modedness, and show
that it makes a convenientprogram representation for analysis and transformation.
KEYWORDS:compilers,controlflowgraphs,intermediaterepresentation,programanalysisand
transformation, SSA
1 Introduction
Most compilers, regardless of the programming language(s) and paradigms supported,
usesomeIntermediateRepresentation (IR)betweenparsingtheinputprogramandemit-
ting the object code. Use of an IR has the significant advantage of allowing a compiler
to target multiple CPU architectures, and even multiple programming languages, with-
out duplicating the bulk of the compiler, which operates exclusively onthe IR. Overthe
courseofthecompilation,thisrepresentationwillbeanalysedfordifferentcharacteristics
andtransformedin varioussemantics-preservingways,in preparationforefficient object
code generation. Thus it is important for an IR to make program analysis and transfor-
mationassimpleandconvenientaspossible.Three-address code hasbeenapopularform
∗This work was supported by the Australian Research Council through Discovery Project Grant
DP140102194.
2 G. Gange et al.
Prog → Func∗ Head → Name(Var∗)
Func → Head Block Block∗ Prim → Var =Val
Block → BlockID :Prim∗BlockExit | Var =Val ⊙Val
BlockExit → returnVal | Name(Val∗)
| if Test BlockID BlockID Test → Val <Val
| gotoBlockID Val → Var |Const
Fig. 1. A three-address code language
Block → BlockID :Phi∗Prim∗BlockExit
Phi → Var =ϕ(Var∗)
Fig. 2. Changes to three-address language to produce SSA
forthispurposeformanyyears.Figure1presentsathree-addresscodelanguage.Herewe
assumewearegivenName,thesetofallpossiblefunctionnames;Var,thesetofvariable
names;andConst,thesetofallprimitiveconstantvalues.WeletPrimval =Var∪Const.
To simplify exposition, we let ⊙ stand for all primitive arithmetic and logical operators,
and < stand for all primitive binary comparison operators.
Eachbasic block ofafunctionisasequenceoffunctioncallsandprimitiveinstructions,
ending with a control transfer to another basic block. Once control enters a basic block,
it is guaranteed to reach its end (unless some exceptional circumstance arises). This
guarantee makes analysis of each basic block straightforward.
Apopularvariantofthree-addresscodeisStaticSingleAssignment (SSA)form(Alpern et al. 1988;
Cytron et al. 1991; Lattner and Adve 2004). SSA was proposed as a way to generalize
value numbering,atechniqueusedtoremoveredundantcomputation.InSSAform,each
variable is assigned at most once in its scope. Where a variable would be reassigned, a
new variable is instead introduced. Since each variable is only assigned once, it is not
necessary to consider the program point when referring to a variable, only the function
it appears in. This makes many analyses simpler and more efficient, because a single
abstract value can be associated with each variable name in a function, and the set of
variable names of interest is limited and easily determined.
A basic block with multiple predecessors presents a complication for SSA: a variable
use in such a block may refer to definitions of those variables in any of the predecessor
blocks. To give such a variable a single definition, SSA introduces the concept of a ϕ
node: the variable is assigned the result of a “fake” function that takes as input the
version of the variable from each predecessor block. A block with multiple predecessors
will contain as many ϕ nodes as it has variables with alternative definitions in earlier
blocks. Figure 2 presents the changes to three-address syntax needed to transform to
SSA: eachblock may begin with ϕ nodes.Consider,forexample, the C code to compute
the greatest common divisor shown in Figure 3 (left side). This code can be converted
into SSA form as shown in Figure 3 (right).
Severalresearchershavepresentedprogramanalysesthatworkbyfirsttransformingan
imperative source program (e.g., Spoto et al. (2010) and Albert et al. (2012)), or Java
bytecode(e.g.,Benton and Fischer (2007))intoanabstractformbasedontheconstructs
oflogicprogramming,andthenanalysingthisresult.Others(e.g.,Whaley et al. (2005))
haveusedlogicprogramstorepresentprogramanalyses.Insomecasesthisbenefitsfrom
Relational IR 3
int gcd(int a, int b) {
entry: tail:
while (b != 0) {
br header returna1
int t = b;
b = a % t;
body:
a = t;
t0=b1 header:
}
b0=a1mod t0 b1=ϕ(b,b0)
return a;
a0=t0 a1=ϕ(a,a0)
}
br header if (b16=0) body tail
Fig. 3. The gcd function in C (left) and LLVM-style SSA form (right)
existing logic program analyses, but the greater benefit derives from the simple, tradi-
tional TP semantics for logic programs, and hence simpler and more powerful analyses.
Logic programs have none of the limitations of SSA form that we detail below.
In this paper we propose representing an imperative source program as a logic pro-
gram throughout the compilation process. It may be surprising to think of compiling C
programs by translation to Prolog, rather than the reverse, but we show that placing a
few limitations on the generated logic programs leaves low-level programs suitable for
high-levelanalysisandtransformation,andalsoforfinaltranslationtomachinelanguage.
In Section 2 we discuss problematic aspects of SSA and related forms, together with
suggestedwaysofaddressingtheproblem.InSection3weintroduce“LogicProgramming
(LP) Form” and we show how to translate a three-address code to it. In Sections 4 and
5 we give example analyses for LP form. In Section 6 we discuss related work. Finally,
Section 7 reviews what has been achieved with the proposed LP form, and concludes.
2 SSA and Allied Forms: Problems and Solutions
While SSA form does simplify a number of common
program analyses, it has significant limitations that
entry:
interfere with others. Most of these problems can be
if (x<0) left right
solved, at the cost of further complicating the SSA
form.Inthissectionwewillconsidertheselimitations.
left: right:
y0=−x y1=x
2.1 Path obliviousness
z0=x z1=−x
Basicblocks do notindicate the constraintsthat must br tail br tail
be satisfied for them to be entered. These constraints
appear in predecessor blocks. In a forward analysis,
tail:
this means constraints must be propagated from con-
y2=ϕ(y0,y1)
ditional branches to their target blocks. A backward
z2=ϕ(z0,z1)
analysis is clumsier: it must peek backward into each
t=z2−1
predecessor block to see what conditions hold.
u=y2 mod t
Consider, for example, forward interval analysis of
the code shown in Figure 4. The blocks left and right
bothreferto “x”sothereis nostraightforwardwayto
Fig. 4. SSA and branching
4 G. Gange et al.
separate the reasoning that needs to be done under different assumptions about x. The
next section considers the use of different names for x in the separate branches, which
wouldhelp in this example. However,as it stands, we cannot assignnon-trivialintervals
to y2 and z2 in the absence of path constraints that record how control reached tail.
To solve the path obliviousness problem, Ballance et al. (1990) have proposed the use
of Gated Single-Assignment form (GSA). SSA’s ϕ nodes are replaced by different types
of gating functions. These capture the control conditions that determine which of the
various definitions that reach the node should provide its value. One gating function,
γ, is in essence an if-then-else function. For example we might translate ϕ(x1,x2) to
γ(P,x1,x2), where P is some branch condition from elsewhere in the program. Flow of
definitions inside loops are managedby additional gating functions to handle initial and
loop-carriedvalues (µ nodes) as well as loop-exiting values (η nodes).
This form makes information flow more transparent, but it is extremely complex,
comparedto SSA. The form we propose has greater uniformity, as it does not introduce
avarietyofdifferentmechanismsforthe“joining”or“merging”ofinformation.Moreover,
GSA, as SSA, does not readily lend itself to backward analysis, as discussed next.
2.2 Forward bias
The ϕ nodes of SSA are convenient when analysing each basic block, as they clearly
indicatewhichvariablesofwhichotherblocksprovidevaluestothevariablesoftheblock.
However, this assumes forward analysis. In this direction, where execution paths join,
each variable with alternative sources is indicated by a ϕ node specifying the different
names for each alternative, and because each variable is only defined once per function,
it naturally receives only one abstract value during forward analysis.
Fora backwardanalysis,however,there isnonode dualtoa ϕto indicatethe alterna-
tive destinations that may use each variable following a branch instruction. (While the
branch indicates alternative destinations, it does not specify the variables that may be
usedthere).Importantly,thealternativedestinationsforabranchallhavethesamename
for each variable.In a backwardanalysis,then, different blocks of a function may deter-
mine different abstract values for the same variable name: the virtue of SSA that each
variable has a unique definition in each function does not apply to backwardanalysis.
ConsiderFigure 4 andsuppose we wish to verify whether the divisionis safe, i.e. that
t cannot be 0. In a fixed-width integer context (as we assume here), it is convenient to
use “wrapped intervals” (Gange et al. 2015) as an abstractdomain, as these allow us to
capture both intervals and complemented intervals. Reasoning backwards, we find the
following sufficient safety condition for the tail block: z0,z1 6∈ [1,1]. For x, this then
translates to x6∈[1,1] (for left), and x6∈[−1,−1] (for right). This allows us to conclude
that all will be well if x6∈[−1,1], but that is insufficient to prove safety.
Toaddressthisproblem,Ananian (1999)hasproposedaddingσ nodestoSSAformto
createStatic Single Information (SSI) form.Where SSAformhasaϕnode atthe topof
eachblock indicating where the value of eachvariablein the block comes from,SSI adds
a σ node at the bottom of each branching block indicating where each variable’s value
goes to. This permits reasoning in both directions and provides (variable) names for all
relevantpieces ofinformation.However,itdoesnotaddressanumberofotherproblems,
as we now explain.
Relational IR 5
2.3 Lack of ϕ node compositionality
Foranon-relationalvalueanalysis,whichassignseachvariableasingleabstractvalue,aϕ
nodeconvenientlyspecifiesthattheabstractvalueforavariableisthejoinoftheabstract
values of the input variables. For a relational analysis, however,a ϕ node does not have
such a simple interpretation. Consider an octagon analysis (Min´e 2006) of the program
snippetinFigure4.Forthetwotransitionstothetailblock,wehavex−z0=0∧y0+z0=
0andx−y1=0∧y1+z1=0.Or,assumingSSI,wehavex0≥0∧x0−z0=0∧y0+z0=0
and x1<0∧x1−y1=0∧y1+z1=0. In either case,there is no meaningful (abstract)
interpretation of the statement y2 = ϕ(y0,y1) in isolation that does not throw away
most of these relationships. In particular, we lose the fact that y2+z2 = 0. The two ϕ
nodes must be treated together to prevent this loss of precision. What is really needed
is a single node that conveys the information of (y2,z2)=ϕ((y0,z0),(y1,z1)).
SSIdoesnothelpwiththisproblemandinfacttheremediesdiscussedsofarappearto
address particular symptoms rather than a more fundamental cause which, in our view,
is an insufficiently abstract view of name management.
2.4 Name management
The ϕ and σ nodes of SSA and SSI form require special treatment during analysis. A
ϕ node v = ϕ(v1,v2,...), cannot be treated like a function call, because the variables
mentionedcomefromalternativeblocks—thatis,theycannotexistatthesametime.For
example, when analysing a basic block beginning with v6=ϕ(v3,v5), we must find the
analysis results for the two predecessorblocks, rename v3 to v6 in the first and v5 to v6
in the second, and then find the join of the two and project away other variables in the
originatingblocks.Inessence,allϕ(andσ)nodesinablockmustbetreatedsimilarlyto
thewayafunctioncallistreated:informationaboutactualparametersmustberenamed
to match formal parameters (or vice-versa for backward analysis), information about
variables not conveyed in the call must be projected away, and the join of all incoming
calls must be taken.
Appel (1992) and Kelsey (1995) observed similarities between SSA and continuation-
passing style in functional programming. Later Appel (1998) observed that SSA is in a
sense equivalent to functional programming without continuations, and he presented a
transformationfromSSAtofunctionalprogram(FP)form.Thisformmitigatesthename
management problem, using parameter passing to serve the purpose of ϕ nodes: where
SSA form would have a block with a ϕ node for each variable defined in predecessor
blocks, the FP form has a function with a parameter for each variable defined outside.
Likewise, FP form uses function calls in place of jumps between blocks. Since SSA form
supports function call and return in addition to ϕ nodes and jumps between blocks,
FP form is notably simpler than SSA. So while analyses for SSA form are often only
intra-procedural,analyses for FP form will naturally be inter-procedural as well.
Appel’snote“SSAisfunctionalprogramming”(Appel 1998)conveysthesepointsvery
clearly.But a corollaryis that functional form also preservesforwardbias. We share the
enthusiasm for a declarative formalism but we also point out that a relational view can
offer greater flexibility than a functional view.
6 G. Gange et al.
Prog → Proc∗ Goal → ⊙(Val∗;Var∗)
Proc → Clause∗ | <(Val,Val;)
Clause → Head ←Goal∗ | Name(Val∗;Var∗)
Head → Name(Var∗;Var∗) Val → Var |Const
Fig. 5. An LP form language
2.5 Input/output asymmetry
While each input parameter of a function has a unique name apparent in the function
header,the return value cannot be determined without scanning all the function blocks.
In fact, there may be many alternative variables returned by different blocks. This is
inconvenient for any summarising analysis, which ultimately must project the analysis
result for the function onto the function inputs and output. For example, in Figure 3,
one knows that a1 and b1 are input to the function (this is omitted from the figure to
savespace),but mustexamineallthe blocks ofthe functionto seethat a1is the output.
Infact, a function with morethan one returnmayhave manydifferent output variables.
These problems can be avoided by first transforming the function replacing all return
statements with jumps to a distinguished new final block containing a ϕ node joining
all return values into a new variable, which is then returned. If the function header is
augmentedtorecordthisfinalvariablenamealongwiththefunctionparameters,itwould
not be necessary to scan all blocks to find the unique return variable. This extra step is
not difficult, but is unnecessary for LP form.
Arelatedinconvenienceisthefactthatfunctionscanonlyreturnasingleresult.If,for
example, two functions compute different values through similar computations, and the
two are often called together, it may be desirable to fuse the two functions into a single
one that returns two values. Of course, this may be done by returning a tuple, but in
this case a structure is returned instead of two separate values, which may thwartmany
analyses. This can be solved by allowing functions to return multiple separate values.
2.6 Implicit variable scoping
Whiletheϕnodesofablockindicatesomeofthedefinedvariablesonentrytotheblock,
they donotindicate allofthem. Infact,ablockwith onlyonepredecessorwillgenerally
not have any ϕ nodes at all, and so no indication at all of which variables are defined
on entry. Neither does SSA form provide any indication of which variables of one block
are communicated to its successors.For analyses whose efficiency depend on minimising
the number of variables under consideration, knowing which variables enter and leave a
block would allow irrelevant variables to be projected away.
3 LP Form
SSA is a small refinement of three-address code. We argue that a larger refinement, to a
restrictedform of logic programming,provides the single-assignmentbenefits of SSA for
ease of analysis while avoiding the problems outlined in Section 2.
Relational IR 7
Figure 5 presents a restricted Logic Programming language suitable for representing
low-levelprograms.1 In addition to fitting this grammar,LP form requires that for each
guard (i.e., <) in each clause, there must be at least one other clause for the same
procedure that is identical up to that guard, followed by the complementary guard, and
any two clauses for a procedure must contain complementary guards, up to which they
2
areidentical. Furthermore,allclauseheadsforagivenproceduremustbeidentical.This
tames the nondeterminism of logic programming, ensuring that exactly one clause will
succeed for each set of inputs, and makes analysis of procedures with multiple clauses
simpler.Thatis,onlyoneclauseofeachprocedurewillbeexecuted,andnobacktracking
will be necessary.
This form also tames the multiple modes of a logic programby explicitly dividing the
argumentsintoinputsfollowedbyoutputs,separatedbyasemicolon.Incallstoprimitive
as well as user defined procedures, an input argument must be either a variable or a
constantvalue,andanoutputargumentmustbe avariable.Allparametersinprocedure
heads must be variables. This ensures that variables are free until they are assigned,
after which they are ground. As in Mercury (Somogyi et al. 1996), no dereferencing is
ever needed.
LP form differs from SSA form in the following ways:
• Insteadofblocks,LPformhasclauses;aprocedurecomprisesone ormoreclauses,
exactly one of which will be executed.
• Insteadofconditionalconstructsandcomputedjumps,LPformhasguards,instruc-
tions that can either succeed or fail, determining which clause will be executed.
• It replaces unconditional branches with procedure calls, and loops with recursion.
• All registers (variables) in a clause are either parameters to that procedure or are
defined in that clause, thus it has no need for ϕ nodes.
• It uses parameters to pass data out of, as well as into, procedures, thus it has no
return instruction.
• Itexplicitlymodelschangestodatastructuresandinput/outputoperations,allow-
ing pure functions to be recognisedandoptimised.SSA coulddo this, but, atleast
in the LLVM implementation, does not.
• Where SSA form has four different control transfer operations, plus ϕ nodes, LP
form has only procedure calls and multiple clauses, so LP form is simpler.
Onedisadvantageofthisrepresentationisthatthecommoninitialpartsoftheclausesare
duplicatedfor eachclause,leading to duplicated analysiseffort.Ourcurrentpreliminary
implementationfactorsouttheduplicatedcode,representingaprocedurebodyasatree,
with a sequence of goals at each node, and optionally a guard and two child nodes.
This not only avoids duplicated analysis work, but also ensures that the clauses remain
mutually exclusive and exhaustive through any programtransformations.
1 Details such as handling of type information and symbol tables are outside the scope of this paper.
Ourhandlingofthemissimilartothatofother IRs.
2 Note that, inLPformconstructed directlyfromthree-address code, therewillbe atmostoneguard
inaclause;however,inliningcanproduceclauseswithmultipleguards.
8 G. Gange et al.
v=vars(B0,..B n) hB0,v,idi⇒hB 0 ′,C0,θ0i ··· hB n ,v,idi⇒hB n ′,C n ,θ ni
H =f(p,st;ret,stθ0) H0=f B0 (v,st;ret,stθ0)) ··· H n=f Bn (v,st;ret,stθ n))
f(p)B0,...B n =⇒ (H ←H0)∧(H0←B 0 ′)∧C0∧···∧(H n ←B n ′)∧C n
hΠ,v,θi⇒hΦ,C1,θ′i hΞ,v,θ′i⇒hΘ,C2,θ′′i r∈Primval newvar v′ θ′ =θ[v7→v′]
hΠ;Ξ,v,θi⇒hΦ∧Θ,C1∧C2,θ′′i hv=r,v,θi⇒hv′=rθ,true,θ′i
newvar v′ θ′ =θ[v7→v′] a′=aθ newvar v′,st′ θ′ =θ[v7→v′,st7→st′] a′=aθ
hv=⊙(a),v,θi⇒h⊙(a′;v′),true,θ′i hv=g(a),v,θi⇒hg(a′,st;v′,st′),true,θ′i
newvar st′ θ′ =θ[st7→st′]
hreturnv,v,θi⇒hret=vθ,true,θi hgotoB,v,θi⇒hf B(v,st;ret,st′),true,θ′i
newproc ν C
t
=ν(v,st;ret,st′)←v
i
<v j∧f
Bt
(v,st;ret,st′)
C
f
=ν(v,st;ret,st′)←¬v
i
<v j∧f
Bf
(v,st;ret,st′)
hif (v
i
<v j)B
t
B
f
,v,θi⇒hν(v,st;ret,st′),C t∧C
f
,θi
Fig. 6. Translation from three-address code to LP form
3.1 Translation to LP form
Tosimplify exposition,we assumethe sourceprogramispresentedinthree-addresscode
form.3 We denote by v a sequence of the 0 or more variables comprising the set v.
To track side-effects, our translation uses the distinguished variable st to denote the
stateofthecomputation,includingtheheapandinput/outputstate.Thisensuresopera-
tionsthatmayhaveside-effectswillbeexecutedinthecorrectorder,whileallowingpure
operations to be reordered. We also use ret to hold the value returned by the function.
Figure6presentsourtranslation.HerethenotationΦ=⇒Ψindicatesthatthefunction
definition Φ is transformed to the clauses Ψ. In the remaining transforms, the notation
hΦ,v,θi⇒hΨ,C,θ′ i means that, in the context of substitution θ and variables v, state-
ments Φ are translated to goals Ψ, with extra clauses C and resulting substitution θ′ .
Thesubstitutionsareusedtoensureeachvariablehasasingleassignment,andtheextra
clausesareforauxiliarypredicatesgeneratedtoimplementconditionals.We letnewvarx
and newproc x specify that x is a fresh variable or procedure name, respectively.
Asindicatedbythefirsttransform,eachbasicblockistransformedintoasingleclause
procedure, with one extra clause to invoke the first. For simplicity, each of these clauses
takesallthe variablesappearinginthe function, plus the statevariable st asinputs, and
thereturnvaluevariableretandthestate,asmodifiedbytheblockbody,asoutputs.The
final transform produces a two-clause procedure for each conditional primitive. Because
these transforms are idempotent and non-overlapping,confluence is assured.
Figure7showsthegcdfunctionofFigure3translatedtoLPform.Thetransformation
israthersimple-minded,threadingeveryvariabletoeachclause.However,theneededness
analysis described in Section 5 allows the removal of unnecessary variable threading,
3 BecausevariablesinLPformarescopedtoasingleclause,ratherthantoalltheblocksofafunction
body,translationfromSSAisactuallyless convenient thanfromthree-addresscode.
Relational IR 9
gcd(a,b,st;ret,st′)←gcd (a,b,t,st;ret,st′)
header
gcd
header
(a,b,t,st;ret,st′)←gcdν(a,b,t,st;ret,st′)
gcdν(a,b,t,st;ret,st′)←b6=0∧gcd
body
(a,b,t,st;ret,st′)
gcdν(a,b,t,st;ret,st′)←b=0∧gcd
tail
(a,b′,t,st;ret,st′)
gcd (a,b,t,st;ret,st′)←t′=b∧mod(a,t′;b′)∧a′=t′∧gcd (a′,b′,t′,st;ret,st′)
body header
gcd (a,b,t,st;ret,st)←ret=a
tail
Fig. 7. The gcd program translated to LP form
gcd(a,b;ret)←b6=0∧mod(a,b;b′)∧gcd(b,b′;ret)
gcd(a,b;ret)←b=0∧ret=a
Fig. 8. The translated gcd program of Figure 7 after simplification
and a simple inlining heuristic can remove unnecessary procedures. Figure 8 shows the
translated gcd programafter these transformations.
3.2 Translation from LP form to machine language
TheMercuryproject(Somogyi et al. 1996)hasdemonstratedthatlogicprogramscanbe
translatedtoveryefficientexecutablecodebytrackingpredicatedeterminismatcompile-
timeandeliminatingvariabledereferencing.LPformlikewiseeschewsunificationof“logic
variables” and the need for dereferencing, but goes further, eliminating nondeterminism
and the need for choicepoints and a machine register to track them. Since LP form is
designedtobesuitableforanylanguage,itdoesnotprovideitsownmemorymanagement
solution, and so does not need a register to control memory allocation.
Infact,LPformissurprisinglyclosetothemachinelanguageofcommoncomputers.Its
ability to expressoperations with multiple outputs better reflects CPUcapabilities than
thefunctionalrestrictionimposedbycommonthree-addresslanguages.Forexample,the
x86architecture’sIDIVinstructionproducesbothaquotientandaremainderinseparate
registers,andnumerousinstructionsmodifyflagsinadditiontootherregisters;theseare
better abstracted in LP form than in three-address code.
As mentioned above,our implementation actually factorsout the commoninitial part
ofalltheclausesforaprocedure.Thatis,eachprocedureisrepresentedasabody,which
isalistofgoalsoptionallyendingwithatesttoselectbetweentwo(ormore)subsequent
bodies. This representation closely matches the structure of the code to be generated:
some straight-line code ending with a conditional branch to one alternative and a fall
through to the other.
The end of each clause is also easily translated through last call optimisation: if the
final operation in a clause is a procedure call, that call is changed to an unconditional
branchtothedestination.Ifitisaprimitive,itisfollowedbyareturninstruction.Other
than this, machine code generationfor LP form is similar to SSA or three-address code.
10 G. Gange et al.
p(x,u)←x<0∧negate(x,y)∧z =x∧p1(y,z,u)
p(x,u)←x≥0∧y=x∧negate(x,z)∧p1(y,z,u)
p1(y,z,u)←sub(z,1,t)∧mod(y,t,u)
Fig. 9. Example of Fig 4 in LP form
4 LP form analysis and transformation
InthissectionweshowthatLPformdoesnotsharetheflawsdiscussedinSection2,and
discussits other benefits. Consideragainthe example programofFigure4.After simpli-
fication through inlining of simple procedures and elimination of unnecessary dataflow,
this would be expressed in LP form as shown in Figure 9.4 When performing a forward
interval analysis on this code, the x < 0 condition in the first clause gives the interval
[−∞,−1] for x, [1,∞] for y, and [−∞,−1] for z prior to the call to p1. For the second
clause, we infer [0,∞] for x, [0,∞] for y, and [−∞,0] for z. Computing the join of the
abstract states for the two calls to p1, we have y ∈ [0,∞]∧z ∈ [−∞,0], so analysing
p1 gives us y ∈ [0,∞]∧z ∈ [−∞,0]∧t ∈ [−∞,−1] on reaching the first call to mod,
allowing us to certify the safety of the mod operation. The path-awareness of LP form
gives us stronger analysis results without any extra effort.
Since eachLP formclause is logicallyan unorderedconjunction, it is equally adept at
forwardandbackwardanalysis.ConsiderabackwardanalysisoftheprogramofFigure9
todeterminethesafetyofmodulo(division)operations.Thiswillstartwiththeconstraint
t 6= 0 at the end of p1, which implies z 6= 1 on entry to p1. Analysing the first clause
of p backwards from its call to p1, we deduce z 6= 1∨x 6= 1∨y 6= −1 before reaching
the x < 0 goal. Handling this goal gives us x < 0 → z 6= 1∨x 6= 1∨y 6= −1 ≡ True,
meaning we have nothing else to prove for that clause. Turning to the second clause of
p, we derive x ≥ 0 → z 6= 1∨x 6= −1∨y 6= −1 ≡ True, and again the proof obligation
is discharged.
RelationalanalysesdonotpresentanydifficultyforLPform,becauseithasnoartificial
ϕ nodes to separately combine alternative versions of variables.This is handled through
conventional procedure calls, where the least upper bound is used to combine results
for multiple calls. Consider an octagon analysis (Min´e 2006) of Figure 9. Much like the
analysis discussed in Section 2.3, analysis derives y +x = 0∧z −x = 0∧y +z = 0
leadingto the callto p1 fromclause 1,andy−x=0∧x+z =0∧y+z =0 forclause 2.
Procedurecallsarehandledbyprojectingtheabstractstateontothevariablesappearing
in the call, and computing the least upper bound of the states. In this case, this yields
y+z =0⊔y+z =0≡y+z =0,preservingthestrongresultsobtainedforbothclauses.
The other issues for SSA and FP form discussed in Section 2 are trivially addressed
by LP form. Lacking ϕ nodes, LP form has no issue with name management. Because
LP form is relational, it has no issue with input/output asymmetry. And because each
clause has its own scope, the scope of each variable is obvious.
4 Since the definition of p1 is so simple, in practice it would be inlined, but that would only give us
strongeranalysisresults.
Relational IR 11
5 Specialised analyses for LP form
Liveness analysis is a standard program analysis used to determine for each program
point the set of variables whose values may be needed later. The single assignment
property enjoyed by SSA, FP, and LP forms somewhat simplifies this analysis: because
each variable is assigned only once, it is not necessary to take account of variable re-
assignment.Within a single block (clause) of SSA (LP form) code, this is easily done by
traversing the statements backward, noting the first encountered use of each variable,
whichwillbethelastuseonforwardexecution,andeachvariableassignment,whichwill
bethedefinitionofthatvariable.Tohandlelivenessforawholefunction,analysisresults
must be propagated backward between blocks.
Deadcode eliminationis atransformationto removeunnecessarycode.Any codethat
assignsonly dead variablescan be removed,but doing so may removevariable uses, and
produce stronger results for liveness analysis. Thus it is beneficial to perform liveness
analysisand deadcode eliminationsimultaneously.If this is extended beyond individual
functionstoanentiremoduleorevenawholeprogram,moredeadcodecanbeeliminated.
We present a two-phase interprocedural neededness analysis, which combines liveness
and dead code elimination. The first phase computes neededness dependencies, conjunc-
tions of implications of the form x → y signifying that if variable x is needed on com-
pletion of a goal, then y is needed on entry. This analysis can be performed bottom-up
over a module’s call graph, one strongly connected component (SCC) at a time, which
ensures that all callers of a given procedure, except those in the same SCC, will be ana-
lyzed before the procedure itself. A fixed point must be computed for each SCC, but no
iterationis necessarybetweenSCCs. This reduces the number ofproceduresanalyzedin
each fixed point iteration, since SCCs are typically fairly small.
Formally,wedefineourneedednessdependencydomainN asthesetofconjunctionsof
variable→variableimplications,whereanindividualimplicationx→y indicatesthatif
variablexisneeded,thensoisy.We letS denotethe Goal −→N neededness dictionary
function space, specifying neededness dependencies for many procedures. We define our
analysis with the following functions:
∗
Pd ::P(Proc)−→S Cd ::Goal −→S −→N
Dd ::Proc −→S Gd ::Goal −→P(Var)−→S −→N
Here Pd gives the neededness dictionary for all the procedures in the module; Dd yields
thedictionaryforasingleprocedure;Cd producestheneedednessofasingleclausegiven
a neededness dictionary; and Gd gives the neededness of a single goal given the set of
variables needed later in the clause body and a neededness dictionary.
As shown in Figure 10, the neededness analysis of a module is the least fixed point of
thecombinationofresultsforallproceduresinthemodule,andtheresultforaprocedure
is just the conjunction of the neededness of all its clauses, which is the conjunction of
results for all goals in each clause. The analysis result for a primitive operation is the
conjunction of x → y implications for each output x and each input y. For a primitive
comparison operation, it is the conjunction of x→y for each variable x defined later in
the clause (determined by the defs function) and each input y of the comparison. Since
primitivecomparisonsareguards,theyareonlyneededtodetermineifthefollowingcode
is executed, so they are only needed if some variable defined later is needed.
12 G. Gange et al.
P S =lfp D d
d d
!
d∈S
G
D
d
[p(v i;v o)←(B1,∨···∨B n)] A=λp(v i;v o) . ∃(Var\v i\v o) . C
d
B
k
A
 
1≤k≤n
^
 
C
d
(g1∧···∧g n) A= G
d
g
k
defs(g k+1∧···∧g n) A
1≤k≤n
^
G
d
⊙(v i;v o) V A= y→x
x
^
∈viy
^
∈vo
G <(x,y) V A= (v→x∧v→y)
d
v∈V
^
G
d
p(v i;v o) V A=A p(v i;v o)
Fig. 10. Neededness abstract interpretation
The second analysis phase uses these dependencies to determine which procedure in-
puts and outputs are actually used, beginning by marking all parameters of public (ex-
ported)functions asneeded.This analysisthenproceedstop-downbySCCs throughthe
programcallgraph,witheachSCC processeduntil a fixed pointis reached.In eachiter-
ation, each clause in the SCC is processed with a needed variable formula, initially the
conjunction of the set of output variables of that procedure that are marked as needed.
Processingof a clause proceeds from last goalto first. If any output of a goalis in the
needed variable formula, the goal is marked as needed, and the called procedure has its
needed outputs markedfor when it is processed.Then the neededness dictionary for the
called procedure is conjoined with the current needed variable formula, and the goal’s
output variables are projected out, to produce the new needed variable formula. This
formula then comprises the live variable set for that goal. Primitive goals are simpler: if
anyoutputisintheneededvariableformula,itismarkedasneeded,itsinputsareadded
totheneededvariableformula,anditsoutputs areprojectedout.Onceafixedpointhas
been reached, any goal or parameter not marked as needed can be removed.
6 Related Work
ManyvariantsofSSAhavebeenproposed(Ballance et al. 1990;Gerlek et al. 1995;Chow et al. 1996;
Ananian 1999) and much work has been concerned with how to generate (compact)
SSAanditsvariantsefficiently(Cytron et al. 1991;Tu and Padua 1995;Ananian 1999).
In Section 2 we mentioned the work on FP form by Kelsey (1995) and Appel (1998).
Appel (1998) in fact sketches two translations to FP form, one producing a “flat” se-
quence of function definitions, the other producing nested definitions. The latter uses
fewerfunctionsandvariablesandAppelpointsoutthatthestructureoffunctionnesting
makesthe dominancepropertiesofthe originalcontrol-flowgraphexplicit. Appel (1998)
also uses the equivalent of SSI’s “σ nodes” as a pedagogic tool; the σ nodes are in fact
pushed into successor blocks and become mere “renaming” ϕ nodes.
Relational IR 13
Peralta and Cruz-Carlo´n(2006) briefly sketched a translation from SSA to CLP, but
providedno formal definition of the translation.From their examples it is clear that the
translation differs from the one suggested here. Peralta et al. (1998) showed how to use
CLP analysis tools to analyse imperative programs. Their approach is based on having
aninterpreter, written in CLP, for the imperative languageand then translating (small)
imperative programs through partial evaluation of the interpreter.
Spoto et al. (2010) implement a terminationanalyzerfor Javabytecode by expressing
path-length reasoning as a CLP programand leveragingfrom existing CLP termination
analysis tools. The resulting analyzer is robust and entirely automatic, covering the full
language of Java bytecode. Albert et al. (2012) use a similar approachto cost analysis.
Morales et al. (2015) explore the use of a logic programming language for the imple-
mentation of efficient abstract machines and runtime systems. To this end they use a
Prologvariantwith certainimperativefeatures (mutable variables)thatenablestransla-
tionintoefficientC-stylecodewhilestillallowingforhigh-levelprogramtransformations,
such as partial evaluation of instruction definitions.
CLPhasbeenalsousedasthebasisforsoftwaremodelchecking(Delzanno and Podelski 1999;
Flanagan 2003)ofconcurrentsystems andits use insoftwareverificationtoolsis rapidly
growing.Forexample,ithasbeenadoptedinThreader(Gupta et al. 2011),UFO(Albarghouthi et al. 2012),
SeaHorn(Gurfinkel et al. 2015),HSF(Grebenshchikov et al. 2012),VeriMAP(De Angelis et al. 2014),
Eldarica(Ru¨mmer et al. 2013), andTRACER(Jaffar et al. 2012). The task ofencoding
verificationconditionsis differentto ouraimofprovidinga platformforprogramcompi-
lation, although both require a convenientrepresentationfor reasoningabout programs.
7 Conclusions
WehavedescribedStaticSingleAssignmentform,anddiscussedanumberofproblemsit
causesforsophisticatedanalyses.Manyoftheseproblemshavebeenpreviouslyaddressed,
but no previous work has addressedall of them. One approachthat addressedseveralof
these problems re-conceives a low-level programas a functional program.
We propose going further and viewing a low-level program as a logic program, and
have suggested a simple, deterministic, strongly moded logic programming language as
a compiler intermediate representation.The language is fully declarative; many existing
analyses for logic programming languages will apply directly. We have presented a pow-
erfulanalysisandtransformationforthisform.BecauseLPformusesprocedurecallsfor
allcontroltransfer,operationsthatcrossblockboundariesarenaturallyinter-procedural.
Owingto determinism andsingle-mode restrictions,LP formis surprisinglycloseto ma-
chinelanguage,sofinalcodegenerationisnotdifficult.ThusLPformisasuitablechoice
for a compiler’s intermediate code representation.
We are currently developing an implementation of LP form, which we call LPVM.
This is being used as intermediate representation for a compiler we are developing for a
language combining the benefits of declarative and imperative programming. Since the
procedures of the language support multiple outputs, that facility in LP form is par-
ticularly important. Rather than duplicating the extensive work of the LLVM project
in producing high-quality, peep-hole optimised assembly language for multiple architec-
tures, we plan to do all program analysis and transformation in LP form, and finally
translate to LLVM for final code generation.
14 G. Gange et al.
References
Albarghouthi, A., Li, Y., Gurfinkel, A., and Chechik, M. 2012. Ufo: A framework for
abstraction-andinterpolation-basedsoftwareverification. InProc. 24rd Int. Conf.Computer
AidedVerification,P.MadhusudanandS.A.Seshia,Eds.LectureNotesinComputerScience,
vol. 7358. Springer, 672–678.
Albert, E., Arenas, P., Genaim, S., Puebla, G., and Zanardini, D. 2012. Cost analysis
of object-oriented bytecodeprograms. Theoretical Computer Science 413, 142–159.
Alpern,B.,Wegman,M.N.,andZadeck,F.K.1988. Detectingequalityofvariablesinpro-
grams. InProc.15thACMSIGPLAN-SIGACTSymp.PrinciplesofProgrammingLanguages.
ACM, 1–11.
Ananian, C. S. 1999. The static single information form. M.S. thesis, Princeton University.
Appel, A. W. 1992. Compiling with Continuations. Cambridge University Press.
Appel, A. W. 1998. SSAis functional programming. SIGPLAN Notices 33, 4, 17–20.
Ballance, R. A., Maccabe, A. B., and Ottenstein, K. J. 1990. The program depen-
denceweb: A representation supportingcontrol-, data-, and demand-driveninterpretation of
imperative languages. In Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Conf. Programming Language Design and
Implementation. ACM, 257–271.
Benton, W. C.andFischer, C. N.2007. Interactive,scalable, declarativeprogram analysis:
From prototype to implementation. In Proc. 9th ACM SIGPLAN Int. Conf. Principles and
Practice of Declarative Programming. ACM, 13–24.
Chow, F., Chan, S., Liu, S.-M., Lo, R., and Streich, M. 1996. Effective representation of
aliasesandindirectmemoryoperationsinSSAform. InCompilerConstruction,T.Gyimo´thy,
Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1060. Springer, 253–267.
Cytron, R., Ferrante, J., Rosen, B. K., Wegman, M. N., and Zadeck, F. K. 1991.
Efficiently computingstatic single assignment form andthecontroldependencegraph. ACM
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 13, 4, 451–490.
DeAngelis, E.,Fioravanti, F.,Pettorossi, A.,andProietti, M.2014. VeriMAP:Atool
forverifyingprogramsthroughtransformations. InProc.20thInt.Conf.ToolsandAlgorithms
for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, A. A´braha´m and K. Havelund, Eds. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8413. Springer, 568–574.
Delzanno, G.andPodelski, A.1999. ModelcheckinginCLP. InProc. 5th Int. Conf. Tools
and Algorithmsforthe Construction and AnalysisofSystems,W.R.Cleaveland,Ed.Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1579. 223–239.
Flanagan,C.2003.AutomaticsoftwaremodelcheckingusingCLP.InProgrammingLanguages
and Systems: Proc. 12th European Symp. Programming, P. Degano, Ed. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 2618. Springer, 189–203.
Gange,G.,Navas, J.,Schachte, P.,Søndergaard,H.,andStuckey, P. J.2015. Interval
analysis and machine arithmetic: Why signedness ignorance is bliss. ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages and Systems 37, 1, 1:1–1:35.
Gerlek, M. P.,Stolz, E.,andWolfe, M. 1995. Beyond inductionvariables: Detectingand
classifying sequences using a demand-driven SSA form. ACM Transactions on Programming
Languages and Systems 17, 1, 85–122.
Grebenshchikov, S.,Lopes, N. P.,Popeea, C.,andRybalchenko, A. 2012. Synthesizing
software verifiers from proof rules. In Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Conf. Programming Language
Design and Implementation. ACM, 405–416.
Gupta,A.,Popeea,C.,andRybalchenko,A.2011.Threader:Aconstraint-basedverifierfor
multi-threadedprograms. InProc.23rdInt.Conf.ComputerAidedVerification,G.Gopalakr-
ishnanandS.Qadeer,Eds.LectureNotesinComputerScience,vol.6806.Springer,412–417.
Gurfinkel, A., Kahsai, T., and Navas, J. A. 2015. SeaHorn: A framework for verifying
C programs (competition contribution). In Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Tools and Algorithms for
Relational IR 15
the Construction and Analysis of Systems, C. Baierand C.Timelli, Eds.Vol.9035. Springer,
447–450.
Jaffar, J., Murali, V., Navas, J. A., and Santosa, A. E. 2012. TRACER: A symbolic
executiontoolforverification. InProc. 24th Int. Conf. Computer Aided verification, P.Mad-
husudan and S. A. Seshia, Eds. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7358. Springer,
758–766.
Kelsey, R. A. 1995. A correspondence between continuation passing style and static single
assignment form. SIGPLAN Notices 30, 3, 13–22.
Lattner,C.andAdve,V.2004.LLVM:Acompilationframeworkforlifelongprogramanalysis
andtransformation. InProc. Int.Symp.CodeGeneration andOptimization(CGO’04).IEEE
Comp. Soc., 75–86.
Min´e, A. 2006. Theoctagon abstract domain. Higher-Order and Symbolic Computation 19, 1,
31–100.
Morales, J. F., Carro, M., and Hermenegildo, M. 2015. Description and optimization
of abstract machines in a dialect of Prolog. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming. To
appear.
Peralta, J. C.andCruz-Carlo´n, J. A.2006. Fromstaticsingle-assignment formtodefinite
programs and back. In Pre-Proceedings of 16th International Symposium on Logic Based
Program Synthesis and Transformation (LOPSTR 2006), G. Puebla, Ed. 79–84.
Peralta, J. C., Gallagher, J. P., and Sag˘lam, H. 1998. Analysis of imperative programs
through analysisof constraint logic programs. InStatic Analysis,G.Levi,Ed.LectureNotes
in Computer Science, vol. 1503. Springer,246–261.
Ru¨mmer, P., Hojjat, H., and Kuncak, V. 2013. Disjunctive interpolants for Horn-clause
verification. InProc.25rdInt.Conf.ComputerAidedVerification,N.SharyginaandH.Veith,
Eds. LectureNotes in ComputerScience, vol. 8044. 347–363.
Somogyi,Z.,Henderson,F.,andConway,T.1996. TheexecutionalgorithmofMercury:An
efficientpurelydeclarativelogicprogramminglanguage. JournalofLogicProgramming 29,1–
3, 17–64.
Spoto,F.,Mesnard,R.,andPayet,E´.2010. AterminationanalyzerforJavabytecodebased
on path-length. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 32, 8:1–8:70.
Tu, P. andPadua, D.1995. Efficientbuildingandplacing ofgating functions. InProc. ACM
SIGPLAN Conf. Programming Language Design and Implementation. ACM, 47–55.
Whaley, J., Avots, D., Carbin, M., and Lam, M. S. 2005. Using Datalog with binary
decisiondiagramsforprogramanalysis. InProc. ThirdAsianSymp.Programming Languages
and Systems, K. Yi,Ed. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3780. Springer, 97–118.
