Hyperlink communities in higher-order networks
Quintino Francesco Lotito,1,∗ Federico Musciotto,2 Alberto Montresor,1 and Federico Battiston3
1Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Trento, via Sommarive 9, 38123 Trento, Italy
2Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica Emilio Segr`e, Universit`a di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 18, I-90128, Palermo, Italy
3Department of Network and Data Science,
Central European University, 1100 Vienna, Austria
ABSTRACT
Many networks can be characterised by the presence of communities, which are groups of units
thatarecloselylinked. Identifyingthesecommunitiescanbecrucialforunderstandingthesystem’s
overall function. Recently, hypergraphs have emerged as a fundamental tool for modelling systems
where interactions are not limited to pairs but may involve an arbitrary number of nodes. In this
study,weadoptadualapproachtocommunitydetectionandextendtheconceptoflinkcommunities
to hypergraphs. This extension allows us to extract informative clusters of highly related hyper-
edges. Weanalyzethedendrogramsobtainedbyapplyinghierarchicalclusteringtodistancematrices
amonghyperedgesacrossavarietyofreal-worlddata,showingthathyperlinkcommunitiesnaturally
highlight the hierarchical and multiscale structure of higher-order networks. Moreover, hyperlink
communities enable us to extract overlapping memberships from nodes, overcoming limitations of
traditional hard clustering methods. Finally, we introduce higher-order network cartography as a
practical tool for categorizing nodes into different structural roles based on their interaction pat-
terns and community participation. This approach aids in identifying different types of individuals
in a variety of real-world social systems. Our work contributes to a better understanding of the
structural organization of real-world higher-order systems.
I. INTRODUCTION has been linked to its functional sub-units such
as protein complexes [4, 5] or different social
From social and technological systems to the spheresinsocialsystems[6–8]. Manyreal-world
humanbrain,networkshavebeenusedtostudy systems are characterised by complex commu-
the structure of a wide range of relational nity structure, for instance, hierarchical [2, 9–
data [1]. Network representations of real-world 11], i.e., communities can be recursively split
systems benefit from a variety of methods and into nested sub-units, and overlapping [7, 8],
algorithms available for their analysis and have i.e., nodes might belong to multiple communi-
proven particularly useful in uncovering com- ties at the same time. Yet, traditional commu-
plex patterns of connectivity, both at the lo- nity detection algorithms based on hierarchical
cal and global scales. To investigate the in- grouping of nodes often fail to capture the rela-
terplay between the structure and dynamics of tionshipsbetweenoverlappinggroupsthatchar-
networks, a key analysis is the identification of acterize real-world networks.
their communities [2]. Communities are usu-
An alternative approach is that of link com-
ally defined as groups of related nodes, with
munities [12, 13], which aims to identify groups
nodes in the same community sharing many
ofinteractionsratherthannodes. Indeed,nodes
more links than nodes in different communi-
can simultaneously belong to multiple groups
ties [3]. The community structure of a system
(for instance, an individual might have a fam-
ily,acircleoffriends,andateamofcolleagues).
However, interactions typically occur for a sin-
∗ quintino.lotito@unitn.it gular purpose, such as two individuals con-
4202
beF
91
]IS.sc[
3v58310.3032:viXra
2
nected by a shared interest or a family rela- tems.
tion [13]. By looking at the communities of the While there have been some recent efforts to
links of a given node and exploiting a dual net- understand the mesoscale organization of real-
work representation where edges are connected world hypergraphs [53–60], this topic remains
if they share a common node [12], it is possible relatively unexplored. In particular, link com-
to reconstruct the overlapping modular struc- munities have been shown to provide new in-
ture of the interactions of the different nodes. sightsintothemesoscalestructureofreal-world
While deviating fromthe standard definition of pairwisenetworks,yetthemodularorganization
communities, which requires them to be groups of interactions in higher-order systems has not
of nodes instead of edges, link communities are been investigated. Here, we propose a frame-
able to explain the seemingly opposing struc- work to detect hyperlink communities, which
turalprinciplesofoverlappingcommunitiesand allowstheidentificationofclustersofcloselyre-
hierarchy. latedhigher-orderinteractionsofarbitrarysize.
We illustrate the applicability of our method
While widely used, traditional graph repre-
on a variety of real-world higher-order systems,
sentations are not always able to capture accu-
unravelling distinct organization principles re-
rately the patterns of interactions that occur in
vealed at different topological scales. We char-
the real world [14]. Indeed, networks can only
acterize the patterns of connections of system
properly represent dyadic relationships, where
units across hyperedges belonging to different
pairs of nodes are connected by links [15–17].
clusters, revealing a complex overlapping mod-
In recent years, however, systems such as cel-
ularorganizationwhichcanbeconvenientlyde-
lular networks [18], brain networks [19, 20], so-
scribed through hypergraph cartography. Our
cial systems [21], ecosystems [22], human face-
work contributes to a better understanding of
to-face interactions [23], and collaboration net-
the real-world organization of higher-order sys-
works [24] have all demonstrated that a signif-
tems.
icant portion of interactions involves three or
more nodes at the same time. Mathematical
frameworkslikehypergraphs[25]arewell-suited
II. HYPERLINK COMMUNITIES
to explicitly encode such higher-order systems,
where hyperedges of various sizes can repre-
The notion of hyperlink communities ex-
sent structured relationships among multiple
tends to hypergraphs the idea of describ-
units typically known as higher-order interac-
ing the mesoscale structure of a system by
tions[15–17]. Higher-ordernetworkapproaches
grouping (higher-order) interactions instead of
have been applied to a range of systems and
nodes. While atypical, this approach can de-
proven effective to understand their behaviour,
scribe the hierarchical organization of hyper-
including the emergence of new collective phe-
edges (Fig. 1a) and node community overlap
nomena [26] in diffusive [27, 28], synchroniza-
(Fig. 1b) as two aspects of the same phe-
tion [29–33], spreading [34–36] and evolution-
nomenon. In a way similar to the seminal
ary [37] processes. To investigate the higher-
work on link communities [13], we define a
orderorganizationofreal-worldsystems, differ-
distance measure between hyperlinks and per-
ent static [38–41] and growing [42, 43] models
form hierarchical clustering on top of them to
havebeenproposed. Moreover, severalnetwork
obtain hyperlink communities (Fig. 1a). Be-
measures and concepts have been adapted to
ing each hyperlink encoded as a set of inter-
consider the presence of higher-order interac-
acting nodes, a natural way to compute the
tions, such as higher-order clustering [44], cen-
distance between two hyperlinks A and B is
trality [45, 46], motifs [47, 48], spectral mea-
to consider their Jaccard distance, defined as
sures[49],toolsfornetworkbackboning[50,51]
and reconstruction [52], providing insights into J(A,B) = 1− |A∩B|. More information about
|A∪B|
the structure and function of higher-order sys- thechoiceofthisdistancemeasurecanbefound
3
a b cal structure of the communities formed dur-
ing the clustering process. In such a dendro-
gram, leaves are hyperlinks from the observed
hypergraphandbranchesarehyperlinkcommu-
nities. Moreover, the height in the dendrogram
of each branch provides additional information
about the strength of the merged communities.
Foraformaldescriptionoftheprocessofbuild-
ing the dendrogram, we refer to algorithm 1.
Thedendrogramcanbecutatdifferentheights,
FIG. 1. Hyperlink communities and their
or thresholds, giving as output different mean-
properties. Hyperlink communities group inter-
ingful community structures, typically reveal-
actionstodescribethemesoscalestructureofahy-
pergraph. This approach is able to explain both ingdistinctmultiscaleorganizationofhyperlink
thehierarchicalorganizationofhyperedgesandthe communities.
overlap of communities among nodes. a) We per-
formhierarchicalclusteringonthehyperlinksofan Data: a hypergraph H=(V,E)
observedhypergraph,consideringtheirJaccarddis- Result: the dendrogram of hyperlink
tance. The output of such clustering is a dendro- communities
gram in which the leaves are the hyperlinks and
the branches are the hyperlink communities. The D← matrix of pairwise distances of
dendrogramcanbecutatdifferentthresholds,each hyperlinks;
threshold potentially giving a meaningful commu- clusters ← each hyperlink is assigned to a
nity structure as output. b) After the cut, each singleton cluster ; /* The leaves of the
hyperlinkisuniquelyassignedtoaspecificcommu-
dendrogram. */
nity. Nodes are then assigned to the set of com- while number of clusters >1 do
munities to which the hyperlinks in which they are merge the clusters with the smallest
activebelong. Asaresult,asinglenodemaybelong distance ; /* The branches of the
to multiple communities simultaneously. dendrogram. The height in the
dendrogram of a branch is the
distance between the two merged
clusters. */
in Appendix A1. To optimize the computa-
end
tionofdistances,weprecomputeandcachesets Algorithm 1: Hierarchical clustering on
of hyperedges with at least one common node. hyperlinks
This strategy allows our distance algorithm to
execute the more time-consuming steps of set-
union and set-intersection only when strictly While after a cut each hyperlink is uniquely
necessary. It is also worth noting that this step assignedtoacommunity,nodesinheritthecom-
can be easily parallelized or distributed in the munitymembershipsofalltheinteractionsthey
case of very large hypergraphs. We perform participatein. Nodesmightparticipatesimulta-
single-linkage hierarchical clustering on top of neously in several communities, although with
thedistancematrixofthehyperlinks. Theclus- differentstrengths. Therefore,anotherproperty
teringprocedurefollowsabottom-upapproach: of hyperlink communities is the ability to nat-
it starts by assigning each hyperlink to its own urally extract overlapping communities of the
cluster and then merges the clusters of hyper- nodes of a hypergraph (Fig. 1b).
linkswiththesmallestaveragedistanceuntilall Explicitly treating link communities at a
the hyperlinks are part of a single cluster. The higher-order level has several advantages with
outputofhierarchicalclusteringappliedonsuch respect to analyzing lower-order projections of
hyperlinks is a dendrogram. The dendrogram hypergraphdatasets. Forinstance,ifweslightly
is a graphical representation of the hierarchi- modify the hypergraph in Fig. 1b by adding
4
library for higher-order network analysis.
A. Multiscale properties of hyperlink
communities
As previously mentioned, the output of the
FIG.2. Drawbacks of lower-order approaches hierarchical clustering algorithm applied to the
to higher-order data. If a large hyperedge (the distance matrix of the hyperlinks is a dendro-
red one) is added to a hypergraph, it can signif- graminwhichtheleavesarethehyperlinks,the
icantly affect its clique-projection, destroying the branches are hyperlink communities, and the
ability of low-order community detection tools to height of a branch encodes information about
captureanyhierarchicalarchitectureandintroduc-
thestrengthofahyperlinkcommunity. Bycut-
ing a large number of new edges to consider in
ting the dendrogram at different thresholds, we
computation. These drawbacks are resolved when
canobtaindifferentcommunitystructures,each
higher-order data are handled using a higher-order
of which may provide valuable insights into the
approach.
organization of the hypergraph. This feature is
useful for performing analyses of a system at
different scales. For example, in a time-varying
a new large hyperedge (Fig. 2), its clique-
system,astudentmightinteractmorewithstu-
projection is heavily affected, since a large
dentssittingnearbyduringalecture,withother
cliqueisintroducedinthesystem. Fromamod-
students in the same class during a break, and
elling perspective, adding this large clique de-
with students from other classes during lunch.
stroys any hierarchical architecture, while from
When aggregated over time, such a variety of
a computational perspective, it adds a huge
patterns mightlead to acomplex multiscale or-
number of new edges to consider in the compu-
ganization of interactions. The shape of the
tation. Ourhigher-orderapproach,bycontrast,
hierarchical clustering dendrogram depends on
does not suffer from such drawbacks.
the patterns of overlap between hyperlinks. To
illustrate how hypergraphs can have very dif-
ferent hierarchies of hyperlinks, depending on
III. RESULTS the distribution of their overlap distances, in
Fig. 3 we show two examples of dendrograms
In order to study real-world hypergraphs, (and their corresponding distance matrix) of
we gathered a collection of freely available hyperlink communities from real-world hyper-
datasets of systems with group interactions. graphs: onerepresentingproximitygroupinter-
The datasets come from a variety of domains, actionsamongbaboonsandtheotherrepresent-
including face-to-face proximity contacts in a ing drugs and their associated class labels. In
primary school, in a high school, in a hospital the following, we show that these two examples
and in a group of baboons [44, 61–64], e-mail areindeedrepresentativeoftwobroaderclasses
exchange (Enron) [44], biology (NDC classes, of real-world hypergraphs.
i.e., class labels applied to drugs) [44] and co- To describe and build a profile of the hierar-
authorshipinthephysicsarea(PACS3: Atomic chy of real-world hypergraphs, we can measure
and Molecular Physics, Arxiv physics and soci- the number of hyperlink communities at dif-
ety) [65]. More information about the datasets ferent increasing thresholds. The specific scal-
used in our experiments can be found in Ap- ing of the number of hyperlink communities
pendix A2. The code of the experiments is can be interpreted as a fingerprint of the hi-
freely available [66] and it is implemented as erarchy of group interactions in real-world sys-
partofhypergraphx[67],anopensourcepython tems. In Fig. 4a, we show such profiles for sev-
5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Baboons NDC classes
FIG. 3. Hierarchical clustering of hyperlinks in real-world hypergraphs. We provide two exam-
ples of dendrograms (and their corresponding distance matrix) of hyperlink communities from real-world
hypergraphs: one representing proximity group interactions among baboons, and the other representing
affiliationsbetweendrugsandclasslabelsappliedtoeachdrug. Hypergraphscanshowverydifferenthier-
archies of hyperlinks, due to different statistics of their overlap distances. In particular, we identified two
broader classes of real-world hypergraphs, of which these two examples are representative.
eral datasets from different domains, highlight- Statistics about the hyperlink communities
ingtheemergenceofdifferentbehaviours. Data obtained by cutting the dendrogram at differ-
onsocialproximity,suchascontactswithinhos- ent thresholds can vary significantly. Fig. 4b
pitalsandschools,revealsdistinctspikesatcer- shows the distributions of the size of hyperlink
tain thresholds (red lines). These spikes corre- communities at three different significant cuts
latewithaprevalentrecurrenceofspecificover- for a subset of the selected datasets, with ex-
lapping patterns among hyperlinks. This be- amples from the two identified classes of real-
haviour indicates that the dendrograms are hi- world hypergraphs. The community structure
erarchically organized in a few, important dis- can change significantly across different scales.
tinct topological levels. Instead, affiliation and Thisdemonstratesthatnotonlydothedendro-
co-authorship data show a smoother decreas- grams encode information about a hypergraph
ing curve (blue lines). While such datasets ap- at multiple scales, but it is also valuable to an-
proach 0 at differing rates, they do not exhibit alyze each level since they can provide distinct
significantspikes. Thisbehaviourindicatesthat insightsintotheglobalorganizationofasystem.
smootherhierarchicaltransitionsareassociated
withthedifferentsystemscales. Ourmultiscale
analysis highlights the emergence of two fami-
B. Overlapping communities at multiple
lies of real-world hypergraphs, distinguished by
scales
their scaling profiles. This characterization of
hypergraphs is in agreement with purely local
methods, such as motif analysis [47]. Previouslywementionedthatbycuttingata
certain threshold the dendrogram constructed
6
a b
Patterns linked to spikes Hyperlink community size
FIG. 4. Multiscale properties of higher-order networks. Hierarchical clustering dendrograms can
be cut at several thresholds, allowing for the extraction and analysis of hyperlink communities at multiple
scales. a) The scaling of the number of hyperlink communities can be interpreted as a fingerprint of the
hierarchicalorganizationofgroupinteractionsinreal-worldsystems. Duetotheover-abundanceofcertain
patterns of overlap between small group interactions social proximity data (red lines) show clear spikes in
theircurves. b)Evolutionofthestatisticsofthehyperlinkcommunitiesatdifferentthresholds. Hyperlink
community structures can change significantly across scales.
by applying hierarchical clustering on the hy- andscales,toquantifynodecommunityoverlap
perlinksdistancematrix,notonlydoesthealgo- in real-world hypergraphs.
rithm uniquely assign a community to each hy-
In Fig. 5, we analyze the distributions of
perlink,butalsoassignsmultiple(possiblyover-
nodecommunitysizes(i.e.,thenumberofnodes
lapping) communities to nodes. By varying the
participating in a community) and node com-
dendrogram-cutting threshold, we can extract
munity memberships (i.e., the communities a
overlapping communities across various scales.
node simultaneously participates in) at differ-
Having fixed a dendrogram-cutting threshold,
ent cuts of the dendrogram. We find real-
foranoden,wecandefinethecommunitymem-
world hypergraphs to exhibit a wide spectrum
bership vector v as:
n
of node community sizes, generally exponen-
tially distributed. The distributions of com-
v ={c(e):e∈E(n)} (1) munity memberships per node at different cuts
n
of the dendrogram remain in line across cut
where E(n) is the set of hyperlinks in which heights and show that nodes tend to consis-
n participates, and the function c(e) assigns a tently participate in more than one community
hyperlink to its community. atthesametime. Thissuggeststhatreal-world
In the following, we study the community hypergraphs present overlapping structures at
membershipvectorsofthenodesacrossdatasets multiple scales. Moreover, the different shapes
7
a
high school
103
102
101
100
100 101 102
b
seitinummoc
fo
rebmuN
sedon
fo
rebmuN
hospital phys-soc NDC Classes
104
103
102
102
102
101
101
101
100 100 100
100 101 102 100 101 102 100 101 102
Size of node communities
102
104
101 103 102
101 102
101
101
100 100 100 100
100 101 102 100 101 102 100 101 102 100 101 102
Number of different communities a node participates in
FIG. 5. Statistics of overlapping communities at multiple scales. The distribution of node com-
munity sizes and node community memberships for several hypergraphs at three different dendrogram
thresholds reveals the multiscale overlapping structure of real-world hypergraphs at their mesoscale. The
hypergraphs show a wide range of community sizes, generally exponentially distributed, throughout the
dendrogram. The distributions of community memberships per node show that nodes tend to participate
simultaneouslyinmorecommunities. Thisbehaviourisconsistentacrossscales. Proximitydatahasamore
pervasive overlapping structure than the other datasets.
ofthedistributionshighlightonceagainthedif- representative cut, and equal to 0 otherwise.
ferentbehaviourofthetwofamiliesofdatasets, Toidentifynodeswithsimilarconnectivitypat-
with proximity data having a more pervasive terns,wecomputepairwisesimilaritiesbetween
overlapping structure. binaryvectorsusingtheJaccardsimilarity. For
each dataset, we create the role-to-role simi-
In Fig. 6a, we provide a comparison be-
larity matrix M in which M is the average
tween the overlapping communities extracted ij
similarity between the vectors of the units with
fromreal-worldhypergraphsandtheassociated
role i and the units with role j. In the hospital
metadata. For the hospital dataset, describing
dataset, we show that the average similarity of
proximity interactions among people inside a
thevectorsofnodeswiththesameroleishigher
hospital, each node is characterized by meta-
than that of nodes with different roles. This is
data about their role (e.g., nurse). For the
particularly true for medics and nurses. How-
high-school and primary-school datasets, de-
ever, this is not true for specific roles such as
scribing proximity interactions among students
patients, who tend not to overlap much neither
andteachersinsideaprimaryschoolandahigh
withotherrolesorwithotherpatients. Inasim-
school, we have information about the class of
ilar way, we notice that students from the same
eachindividual. Foreachnoden,wecomputea
class in both high school and primary school
binary community membership vector. In this
datasets tend to be more similar than students
vector, for a node n, entry i is equal to 1 if
from different classes. Moreover, some addi-
node n participates in the community i at the
8
a
b
FIG.6. Comparingoverlappingcommunitiesandnodemetadata. Weselectathresholdforcutting
the dendrogram and extracting overlapping communities, and compare results with metadata from real-
world hypergraphs (role or class). A binary community membership vector is used to identify whether a
nodeparticipatesinacertaincommunity. a)Wemeasurethepairwisesimilaritybetweenthebinaryvectors
(Jaccardsimilarity)andbuildtherole-to-rolesimilaritymatricesbyaggregatingsimilaritiesofnodesbased
on their role. Nodes with similar roles or classes tend to share similar community memberships. However,
patients in the hospital dataset have low overlapping memberships even with other patients. Moreover,
clusteringemergesamongclassesintheprimaryandhigh-schooldatasets,probablybecausetheirproximity
leads to mixing interactions among different classes. b) We measure the diversity (entropy) of community
membershipvectorsforeachroleorclassaveragingnodeswiththesamerole. Certainroles,suchasnurses,
have a more diverse and pervasive overlap, while patients have less diversified interactions. In school
datasets, some classes have more diverse community memberships, possibly due to physical constraints or
participation in more activities.
tional form of clustering emerges, probably due role or class. We measure this property by con-
tothefactthatclassesthataremorephysically sideringtheentropyofthecommunitymember-
close have students that interact more, leading shipvectorforeachnode, averagingnodeswith
to some communities overlapping among those the same role.
classes. Let v be the community membership vector
i
In Fig. 6b, we measure the average diversity for node i, p be the proportion of member-
ij
of the community membership vectors for each shipsofnodeitocommunityj (i.e.,thenumber
9
of distinct hyperlinks assigned to community j (analogous results are obtained by considering
containingnodei), andC bethesetofcommu- entropy). Suchascoreofdiversityrangesfrom0
nitiesnodeiparticipatesin. TheentropyH for (minimum diversity) to 1 (maximum diversity)
node i is: and has also been used to characterize hetero-
geneity in different network structures such as
multiplex networks [69]. In particular, having
C
(cid:88) fixedascaleandcomputedoverlappingcommu-
H(v )=− p log(p ) (2)
i ij ij nities, the participation coefficient of the mem-
j bership vector of node i is defined as
LetN bethenumberofnodeswithroler;to
r
average the entropy for nodes of the same role
r we compute: C  (cid:88) C (cid:32) k[α] (cid:33)2 
P i = C−1  k i  (4)
H¯ = 1 (cid:88) H(v ) (3) α=1 i
r N i
r
i∈r
where C is the number of communities, k is
i
Weshowthat,indeed,differentrolescanhave the hyperdegree of node i and k[α] is the num-
i
a more diverse set of memberships than oth- ber of interactions of node i that are part of
ers. For example, nurses share a more diverse community α.
andpervasiveoverlapthanotherroles,whilepa- In Fig. 7, each node is represented as a point
tients are more strict and less overlapping. In in the Cartesian plane with coordinates equal
the school datasets, there are classes that are to its hyperdegree and participation coefficient.
more favoured than others in having multiple The nodes are classified into different regions
diverse community memberships, possibly due by subdividing both the x-axis and the y-axis
to physical constraints or participation in more into the 33rd and 66th percentiles. On the y-
activities. axis,anodeinthetopthirdisclassifiedashub,
in the middle third as non-hub and in the bot-
tom third as peripheral. On the x-axis, a node
C. Cartography of higher-order networks in the top third is classified as a generalist, in
the middle third as a non-generalist and in the
In the previous sections, we have mentioned bottom third as a specialist. This classification
thatnodescanbecharacterizedintermsoftheir gives a total number of nine structural roles,
simultaneous participation in different commu- corresponding to different regions in the plane.
nities. We have also highlighted that the com- Our results highlight that network nodes with
munity memberships of nodes can range from different structural roles are indeed relevant for
very heterogeneous (i.e., membership vector understanding real-world systems. Nodes with
with high entropy) to very homogeneous (i.e., a similar hyperdegree can have a very different
membership vector with low entropy). Com- participation coefficient, and vice versa. Ad-
munityparticipationbehaviourofnodescanbe ditionally, structural roles can be linked with
linked with their hyperdegree to classify nodes metadatainformation. Forexample,inhospital
into different structural roles. data,weobservethatpeoplewiththesamejobs
We measure the hyperdegree of each node by or status can have very different behaviours,
consideringthenumberofinteractionstheypar- e.g., patients tend to be peripherals but can
ticipate in. Community membership diversity range from specialists to generalists. Finally,
is here computed by considering the participa- in school data, in the same class, we have mul-
tion coefficient of the membership vectors, pay- tiple representatives for each structural role. In
ing homage to the seminal work by Guimera et AppendixA3weprovidemoreexamplesofcar-
al. onthecartographyofcomplexnetworks[68] tography of real-world hypergraph data.
10
snoitcaretni
fo
rebmuN
hospital primary school high school
200 ADM 250 5B 140 2BIO3
NUR 5A 2BIO2
175 MED 4A 120 PSI*
150 PAT 200 Teachers PC
3B 100 PC*
125 4B MP*1
150 80
100 2A 2BIO1
1B 60 MP
75 100 2B MP*2
50 1A 40
3A
25 50 20
0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Participation coefficient
FIG. 7. Cartography of higher-order networks. We provide a cartography of higher-order networks,
wherenodesareclassifiedbasedbothontheirnumberofinteractions(hyperdegree)andmixed-membership
to hypergraph communities (participation coefficient). This classification yields nine structural roles (hub,
non-hub, or peripheral on the y-axis; generalist, non-generalist, or specialist on the x-axis), where com-
plementary information is provided by the two variables. We apply our method to three face-to-face
higher-ordersocialsystems, showinghowitcanbeusedtocapturemetadatainformation. Asanexample,
hospital patients tend to be peripherals but range from specialists to generalists. By contrast, in school
data, each class has representatives of each structural role.
IV. CONCLUSIONS put of such a process on a variety of real-world
data. Hyperlink communities naturally high-
light the hierarchical and multiscale structure
The analysis of network communities is
of a higher-order network, at the same time re-
widelyrecognizedasafundamentaltoolforun-
vealing overlaps among node communities. Fi-
derstandingtheinterplaybetweenthestructure
nally, we have introduced the notion of the car-
and dynamics of complex systems, finding ap-
tography of higher-order networks, and classi-
plications in fields such as biology and social
fied nodes in different structural roles, i.e., a
network analysis. Network communities are of-
small number of system-independent roles that
ten defined as groups of nodes that are more
depend on the patterns of interactions of the
denselyconnectedtoeachotherwithinthecom-
nodes and their scale-specific overlapping com-
munity than they are to nodes outside of the
munityparticipation. Weshowedthatwiththis
community. Recently, the framework of hyper-
classificationweareabletocaptureinformation
graphs has established itself as a fundamental
that the hyperdegree alone cannot provide.
tool to model systems whose interactions are
not limited to pairs of nodes but may involve Given the interest in link communities in
an arbitrary number of them. pairwise networks, we believe that hyperlink
Using a dual approach to community detec- community detection may serve as a relevant
tion, in this work we have extended the tra- toolforanalysingavarietyofhigher-orderdata,
ditional notion of link communities to hyper- helpingunveilstructuralpatternswhichcannot
graphs, extracting clusters of highly related hy- be explored with traditional community detec-
peredges. By defining a measure to determine tion approaches. In this direction, interesting
the distance between two hyperedges and per- venuesforfutureresearchincludetheevaluation
forming hierarchical clustering on top of the of distance measures for hyperedges alternative
pairwisedistancematrixofsuchhyperedges,we to the Jaccard distance used here, and the de-
studied the dendrogram obtained as the out- velopmentofmethodstoscalethecomputation
11
of hyperlink distances in very large real-world dense to have a meaningful hierarchical scaling
hypergraphs. fingerprint using such distance.
1.0
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
0.8
F.B. acknowledges support from the Air
0.6
Force Office of Scientific Research under
award number FA8655-22-1-7025. A.M.
0.4
acknowledges support from the European
UnionthroughHorizonEuropeCLOUDSTARS 0.2
project (101086248).
0.0
0 5 5 5 0
0.
0.
2 0.
0.
7 1.
Appendix A: Supplementary Information
Cut height
1. Distance measures for hyperedge
similarity
Inthemaintext,weusetheJaccarddistance
because it allows us to investigate patterns of
overlapping hyperedges, obtaining an interest-
ing characterization of two different classes of
higher-order networks. Moreover, Jaccard dis-
tance is coherent with hypergraphs line-graph
definitions[70]andtheuseofgraphsline-graph
for computing overlapping communities [12]. It
is also worth noting that our proposed distance
iseasiertocomputethanadirectgeneralization
of the distance defined in [13], although both
are computationally expensive. Interestingly,
two hyperedges having high/low Jaccard dis-
tancetendtohavehigh/lowdistanceasdefined
in [13]. We measured the correlation (Pear-
son) between the two distances in the following
datasets, selecting a couple of examples from
each discovered class: high school (r = 0.96,
p < 0.01), Enron mail (r = 0.87, p < 0.01),
NDC classes (r = 0.55, p < 0.01) and PACS3
(r = 0.70, p < 0.01). Moreover, Fig. A1
shows that results regarding the separation of
two classes of higher-order data still hold with
a generalization of the distance defined in [13].
Thedatasetaboutinteractionsofbaboonsistoo
seitinummoc
fo
rebmun
.mroN
hs
ps
hospital
enron
PACS3
phys-soc
NDC classes
FIG. A1. Hierarchical scaling fingerprints com-
puted using a direct generalization of the distance
definedin[13]. Theseparationoftwoclassesofdata
also holds using this distance.
2. Datasets
Summarystatisticsofthedatasetsusedinour
experiments is reported in Table A1.
3. Higher-order cartography for additional
datasets
In Fig. A2 we show the cartography for ad-
ditional systems. Consistently with the dataset
discussedinthemaintext, theplotsshowlarge
heterogeneity, with nodes with the same num-
ber of interactions spanning very different val-
ues of participation coefficients. These rela-
tional datasets do not have information about
node attributes, and hence – differently from
the social proximity datasets presented in the
maintexts–donotallowustocomparehigher-
order roles for same-class nodes and different-
classnodes. Inthesedatasets,theparticipation
coefficient distribution is skewed towards 0.
12
Dataset N E E E E E Domain
2 3 4 5
Phys-soc 26800 15311 3700 4135 2854 1613 Co-auth
NDC classes 1161 1088 297 121 125 94 Bio
PACS3 33479 16977 2099 2105 2590 1169 Co-auth
ENRON 143 1512 809 317 138 63 E-mail
Primary school 242 12704 7748 4600 347 9 Proximity
High school 327 7818 5498 2091 222 7 Proximity
Hospital 75 1825 1108 657 58 2 Proximity
Baboons 13 231 78 142 11 0 Proximity
TABLE A1. Details of the real-world networked datasets considered for our experiments. Real-world
hypergraphs from different domains are described by their number of nodes, total number of hyperedges
and number of hyperedges of size 2, 3, 4 and 5.
snoitcaretni
fo
rebmuN
Participation coefficient
FIG. A2. Higher-order cartography for additional datasets.
[1] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, [5] A.-C. Gavin, P. Aloy, P. Grandi, R. Krause,
M. Chavez, and D.-U. Hwang, Complex M.Boesche,M.Marzioch,C.Rau,L.J.Jensen,
networks: Structure and dynamics, Physics S. Bastuck, B. Du¨mpelfeld, et al., Proteome
Reports 424, 175 (2006). surveyrevealsmodularityoftheyeastcellma-
[2] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, Commu- chinery, Nature 440, 631 (2006).
nitystructureinsocialandbiologicalnetworks, [6] S. Wasserman, K. Faust, et al., Social network
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- analysis: Methods and applications (Cam-
ences 99, 7821 (2002). bridge university press, 1994).
[3] S. Fortunato and D. Hric, Community detec- [7] G. Palla, I. Der´enyi, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek,
tioninnetworks: Auserguide,Physicsreports Uncovering the overlapping community struc-
659, 1 (2016). tureofcomplexnetworksinnatureandsociety,
[4] N. J. Krogan, G. Cagney, H. Yu, G. Zhong, nature 435, 814 (2005).
X.Guo,A.Ignatchenko,J.Li,S.Pu,N.Datta, [8] G.Palla,A.-L.Baraba´si,andT.Vicsek,Quan-
A. P. Tikuisis, et al., Global landscape of pro- tifyingsocialgroupevolution,Nature446,664
teincomplexesintheyeastsaccharomycescere- (2007).
visiae, Nature 440, 637 (2006). [9] E.Ravasz,A.L.Somera,D.A.Mongru,Z.N.
Oltvai, and A.-L. Baraba´si, Hierarchical orga-
13
nization of modularity in metabolic networks, ports 11, 1 (2021).
science 297, 1551 (2002). [24] A. Patania, G. Petri, and F. Vaccarino, The
[10] M. Sales-Pardo, R. Guimera, A. A. Moreira, shapeofcollaborations,EPJDataScience6,1
andL.A.N.Amaral,Extractingthehierarchi- (2017).
cal organization of complex systems, Proceed- [25] C. Berge, Graphs and hypergraphs (North-
ingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences104, Holland Pub. Co., 1973).
15224 (2007). [26] F. Battiston, E. Amico, A. Barrat, G. Bian-
[11] A.Clauset,C.Moore,andM.E.Newman,Hi- coni, G. Ferraz de Arruda, B. Franceschiello,
erarchicalstructureandthepredictionofmiss- I. Iacopini, S. K´efi, V. Latora, Y. Moreno,
ing links in networks, Nature 453, 98 (2008). et al., The physics of higher-order interactions
[12] T. S. Evans and R. Lambiotte, Line graphs, in complex systems, Nature Physics 17, 1093
link partitions, and overlapping communities, (2021).
Phys. Rev. E 80, 016105 (2009). [27] M.T.Schaub,A.R.Benson,P.Horn,G.Lipp-
[13] Y.-Y. Ahn, J. P. Bagrow, and S. Lehmann, ner, and A. Jadbabaie, Random walks on sim-
Linkcommunitiesrevealmultiscalecomplexity plicial complexes and the normalized hodge 1-
in networks, nature 466, 761 (2010). laplacian, SIAM Review 62, 353 (2020).
[14] R. Lambiotte, M. Rosvall, and I. Scholtes, [28] T. Carletti, F. Battiston, G. Cencetti, and
From networks to optimal higher-order mod- D. Fanelli, Random walks on hypergraphs,
elsofcomplexsystems,Naturephysics15,313 Physical Review E 101, 022308 (2020).
(2019). [29] P. S. Skardal and A. Arenas, Higher order in-
[15] F. Battiston, G. Cencetti, I. Iacopini, V. La- teractions in complex networks of phase oscil-
tora, M. Lucas, A. Patania, J.-G. Young, and lators promote abrupt synchronization switch-
G. Petri, Networks beyond pairwise interac- ing, Communications Physics 3, 1 (2020).
tions: structure and dynamics, Physics Re- [30] A. P. Milla´n, J. J. Torres, and G. Bianconi,
ports 874, 1 (2020). Explosive higher-order kuramoto dynamics on
[16] L. Torres, A. S. Blevins, D. Bassett, simplicial complexes, Physical Review Letters
and T. Eliassi-Rad, The why, how, and 124, 218301 (2020).
when of representations for complex [31] M. Lucas, G.Cencetti,andF.Battiston, Mul-
systems, SIAM Review 63, 435 (2021), tiorderlaplacianforsynchronizationinhigher-
https://doi.org/10.1137/20M1355896. order networks, Physical Review Research 2,
[17] F. Battiston and G. Petri, Higher-Order Sys- 033410 (2020).
tems (Springer, 2022). [32] L.V.Gambuzza,F.DiPatti,L.Gallo,S.Lepri,
[18] S. Klamt, U.-U. Haus, and F. Theis, Hyper- M.Romance,R.Criado,M.Frasca,V.Latora,
graphsandcellularnetworks,PLOSComputa- and S. Boccaletti, Stability of synchronization
tional Biology 5, e1000385 (2009). in simplicial complexes, Nature Communica-
[19] G. Petri, P. Expert, F. Turkheimer, tions 12, 1 (2021).
R. Carhart-Harris, D. Nutt, P. J. Hellyer, [33] Y. Zhang, M. Lucas, and F. Battiston, Do
and F. Vaccarino, Homological scaffolds of higher-orderinteractionspromotesynchroniza-
brain functional networks, Journal of The tion? (2022).
Royal Society Interface 11, 20140873 (2014). [34] I.Iacopini,G.Petri,A.Barrat,andV.Latora,
[20] C. Giusti, R. Ghrist, and D. S. Bassett, Two’s Simplicial models of social contagion, Nature
company,three(ormore)isasimplex,Journal Communications 10, 1 (2019).
of Computational Neuroscience 41, 1 (2016). [35] S. Chowdhary, A. Kumar, G. Cencetti, I. Ia-
[21] A. R. Benson, D. F. Gleich, and J. Leskovec, copini, and F. Battiston, Simplicial contagion
Higher-order organization of complex net- in temporal higher-order networks, Journal of
works, Science 353, 163 (2016). Physics: Complexity 2, 035019 (2021).
[22] J. Grilli, G. Baraba´s, M. J. Michalska-Smith, [36] L. Neuha¨user, A. Mellor, and R. Lambiotte,
and S. Allesina, Higher-order interactions sta- Multibody interactions and nonlinear consen-
bilizedynamicsincompetitivenetworkmodels, sus dynamics on networked systems, Physical
Nature 548, 210 (2017). Review E 101, 032310 (2020).
[23] G. Cencetti, F. Battiston, B. Lepri, and [37] U. Alvarez-Rodriguez, F. Battiston, G. F.
M.Karsai,Temporalpropertiesofhigher-order de Arruda, Y. Moreno, M. Perc, and V. La-
interactions in social networks, Scientific Re- tora,Evolutionarydynamicsofhigher-orderin-
14
teractions in social networks, Nature Human [51] F. Musciotto, F. Battiston, and R. N. Man-
Behaviour 5, 586 (2021). tegna,Identifyingmaximalsetsofsignificantly
[38] O. T. Courtney and G. Bianconi, Generalized interacting nodes in higher-order networks
network structures: The configuration model (2022), arXiv:2209.12712 [physics.soc-ph].
and the canonical ensemble of simplicial com- [52] J.-G. Young, G. Petri, and T. P. Peixoto, Hy-
plexes, Physical Review E 93, 062311 (2016). pergraph reconstruction from network data,
[39] J.-G. Young, G. Petri, F. Vaccarino, and Communications Physics 4, 1 (2021).
A. Patania, Construction of and efficient sam- [53] M.M.Wolf,A.M.Klinvex,andD.M.Dunlavy,
pling from the simplicial configuration model, Advantages to modeling relational data using
Physical Review E 96, 032312 (2017). hypergraphsversusgraphs,in2016IEEEHigh
[40] P. S. Chodrow, Configuration models of ran- Performance Extreme Computing Conference
dom hypergraphs, Journal of Complex Net- (HPEC) (IEEE, 2016) pp. 1–7.
works 8, cnaa018 (2020). [54] A.Vazquez,Findinghypergraphcommunities:
[41] N. Ruggeri, F. Battiston, and C. De Bacco, A a bayesian approach and variational solution,
principled, flexible and efficient framework for Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
hypergraph benchmarking (2022). Experiment 2009, P07006 (2009).
[42] K. Kovalenko, I. Sendin˜a-Nadal, N. Khalil, [55] T.Carletti,D.Fanelli,andR.Lambiotte,Ran-
A. Dainiak, D. Musatov, A. M. Raigorodskii, dom walks and community detection in hy-
K.Alfaro-Bittner,B.Barzel,andS.Boccaletti, pergraphs, Journal of Physics: Complexity 2,
Growing scale-free simplices, Communications 015011 (2021).
Physics 4, 1 (2021). [56] A. Eriksson, D. Edler, A. Rojas,
[43] A. P. Milla´n, R. Ghorbanchian, N. Defenu, M. de Domenico, and M. Rosvall, How
F. Battiston, and G. Bianconi, Local topologi- choosingrandom-walkmodelandnetworkrep-
calmovesdetermineglobaldiffusionproperties resentation matters for flow-based community
of hyperbolic higher-order networks, Physical detection in hypergraphs, Communications
Review E 104, 054302 (2021). Physics 4, 1 (2021).
[44] A.R.Benson,R.Abebe,M.T.Schaub,A.Jad- [57] P. S. Chodrow, N. Veldt, and A. R. Ben-
babaie,andJ.Kleinberg,Simplicialclosureand son, Generative hypergraph clustering: From
higher-orderlinkprediction,Proceedingsofthe blockmodels to modularity, Science Advances
National Academy of Sciences 115, E11221 7, eabh1303 (2021).
(2018). [58] P. Chodrow, N. Eikmeier, and J. Had-
[45] A. R. Benson, Three hypergraph eigenvector dock, Nonbacktracking spectral clustering
centralities, SIAM Journal on Mathematics of of nonuniform hypergraphs, arXiv preprint
Data Science 1, 293 (2019). arXiv:2204.13586 (2022).
[46] F. Tudisco and D. J. Higham, Node and [59] M.Contisciani,F.Battiston,andC.DeBacco,
edgenonlineareigenvectorcentralityforhyper- Inference of hyperedges and overlapping com-
graphs, Communications Physics 4, 1 (2021). munities in hypergraphs, Nature communica-
[47] Q. F. Lotito, F. Musciotto, A. Montresor, and tions 13, 1 (2022).
F. Battiston, Higher-order motif analysis in [60] N. Ruggeri, M. Contisciani, F. Battiston,
hypergraphs, Communications Physics 5, 79 and C. De Bacco, Generalized inference of
(2022). mesoscale structures in higher-order networks
[48] Q. F. Lotito, F. Musciotto, F. Battiston, and (2023).
A. Montresor, Exact and sampling methods [61] J. Stehl´e, N. Voirin, A. Barrat, C. Cat-
for mining higher-order motifs in large hyper- tuto, L. Isella, J.-F. Pinton, M. Quaggiotto,
graphs, Computing , 1 (2023). W. Van den Broeck, C. R´egis, B. Lina, et al.,
[49] S. Krishnagopal and G. Bianconi, Spectral de- High-resolution measurements of face-to-face
tection of simplicial communities via hodge contactpatternsinaprimaryschool,PloSone
laplacians, Physical Review E 104, 064303 6, e23176 (2011).
(2021). [62] P. Vanhems, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, J.-F.
[50] F. Musciotto, F. Battiston, and R. N. Man- Pinton, N. Khanafer, C. R´egis, B.-a. Kim,
tegna, Detecting informative higher-order in- B.Comte,andN.Voirin,Estimatingpotential
teractions in statistically validated hyper- infectiontransmissionroutesinhospitalwards
graphs, Communications Physics 4, 1 (2021). using wearable proximity sensors, PloS one 8,
15
e73970 (2013). FraLotito/hyperlink-communities (2024).
[63] R. Mastrandrea, J. Fournet, and A. Barrat, [67] Q. F. Lotito, M. Contisciani, C. De Bacco,
Contact patterns in a high school: a com- L.DiGaetano,L.Gallo,A.Montresor,F.Mus-
parison between data collected using wearable ciotto, N. Ruggeri, and F. Battiston, Hyper-
sensors,contactdiariesandfriendshipsurveys, graphx: a library for higher-order network
PloS one 10, e0136497 (2015). analysis, Journal of Complex Networks 11,
[64] V. Gelardi, J. Godard, D. Paleressompoulle, cnad019 (2023).
N. Claidiere, and A. Barrat, Measuring social [68] R. Guimera` and L. A. N. Amaral, Functional
networksinprimates: Wearablesensorsversus cartography of complex metabolic networks,
direct observations, Proceedings of the Royal Nature 433, 895 (2005).
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi- [69] F.Battiston,V.Nicosia,andV.Latora,Struc-
neering Sciences 476, 20190737 (2020). turalmeasuresformultiplexnetworks,Physical
[65] https://journals.aps.org/datasets (2021). Review E 89, 032804 (2014).
[66] Q. F. Lotito, F. Musciotto, A. Mon- [70] S.G.Aksoy,C.Joslyn,C.O.Marrero,B.Prag-
tresor, and F. Battiston, hyperlink- gastis, and E. Purvine, Hypernetwork science
communities, https://github.com/ via high-order hypergraph walks, EPJ Data
Science 9, 16 (2020).
