March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & Engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
Icon Based Information Retrieval and Disease
Identification in Agriculture
Namita Mittal Basant Agarwal Ajay Gupta Hemant Madhur
Dept. of Computer Engineering Dept. of Computer Engineering Dept. of Computer Engg. Dept. of Computer Engineering
MNIT, Jaipur MNIT, Jaipur MNIT, Jaipur, MNIT, Jaipur
barrier and make the Internet reachable to all groups of people. A user
Abstract—Recent developments in the ICT industry in past few decades has
enabled the quick and easy access to the information available on the friendly iconic interface is proposed for the target user to achieve the
internet. But, digital literacy is the pre-requisite for its use. The main goal. The iconic representation is powerful because it is independent of
purpose of this paper is to provide an interface for digitally illiterate any languages. A proper sequence of iconic representation helps the
users, especially farmers to efficiently and effectively retrieve information
user to follow a well-defined line of action.
through Internet. In addition, to enable the farmers to identify the disease
in their crop, its cause and symptoms using digital image processing and
pattern recognition instantly without waiting for an expert to visit the farms Since long, disease identification has remained in the domain of
and identify the disease. experts examination and is mostly done manually. But the disease
patterns vary in shape, size and textures which enables the development
Keywords: Iconic Interface, Image Processing, Pattern
of an autonomous system for disease detection. The
Recognition, Data Mining, Information Retrieval.
system has been developed for two diseases in the rice crop namely leaf
I. INTRODUCTION blast and brown spot.
India currently has the largest illiterate population of any nation
The remaining paper is organized as: Section II describes the related
on earth. In present scenario, 25% people of India are language
work, Section III explains the proposed approach, Section IV narrates
illiterate [9], digital illiteracy is far more than this. To facilitate the
results and Section V discusses the possible future work.
Internet opportunity to the common people, it is needed to represent
the web content in their understandable and interactive form. The
II. RELATED WORK
key problem involved here is the selection of an interactive form
One work related to iconic interface has developed a prototype
which is independent of any language. Iconic interface has emerged
for tourism industry [10]. Following works are related to the disease
as a solution to this problem.
identification in agriculture using various image processing techniques.
In [1], the classification of disease in corn using BP Neural
Farmers are facing problem in identifying diseases in crops,
Network is proposed, in which the RGB model is being converted
most of them are illiterate and unable to understand the reason,
into YCrCb model for segmentation. Another work corresponding to
remedies etc. Most of the farmers are illiterate that’s why they are
the grading of the plant diseases uses conversion of RGB model to
not able to use internet for possible remedies of their infected crops.
HSI model and Ostu method for leaf region segmentation and Sobel
For this problem, iconic interface is proposed through which illiterate
operator for edge detection [2].One work related to the disease
farmers can also select sequence of images for solution of their
identification in the rice crop uses Support Vector Machine and
problem. This iconic interface builds a query on the basis of icons
extracts features based on shape and texture for classification. The
selected by the user. And for identifying diseases in crops, an
System identifies namely three disease leaf blight, sheath blight and
automated system is proposed, this system is consist of the following
rice blast [3]. Another System aimed at identifying diseases in the rice
stages image enhancement, HSI transformation, intensity adjustments
crop uses unsupervised learning through SOM. The System uses
using thresholding, segmentation, feature extraction and disease
entropy based thresholding and 8 connectivity methods for boundary
classification using neural network.
detection [4].One of the related work corresponds to identification of
Brown Spot disease in rice using BP Neural Network and color
This paper discusses mainly two features. One with an iconic
based features [5]. One such work aims at identifying the brown spot
interface where the farmer can interact easily and in return system
in rice crop uses K Means method for segmentation and BP neural
will return solution in native language. Another feature includes an
network for classification of disease [6].
image processing technique in which the farmer has to simply upload
an image (with the assistance of an operator present at the Kisan help
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
center) of the diseased crop and the processing result will show the
1) Iconic Information Retrieval
name of the disease and possible remedial solution for infected crop.
2) Disease diagnosis using image processing techniques
In this system, user can select icons in an interactive way. An
intermediate representation formed from the interaction result is fed • Pre-processing Steps
to processing unit. The objective of this work is to cross the language • RGB to HSI Conversion
• Binary Saturated Mask Generation
• Hue Image Masking With BSM
www.ijascse.org Page 26
March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
• Histogram Generation composing its color. When humans view a color object, we describe it
• Thresholding by its hue, saturation and brightness(hue is the color attribute that
• Spot Detection Using Component Labeling describes a pure color, whereas saturation gives a measure of the degree
• Feature Extraction to which a pure is diluted by white color and brightness is
• System Training a subjective descriptor that is practically impossible to measure).
RGB model is suitable for color generation but HSI model is more
suitable for color description [7].
The equation 1,2 and 3 shown below shows the conversion of
translation rule for conversion of RGB model to HSI model.
H = ArcTan( Sqr t((3(G − R)/(R − G)(R − B))) (1)
I = ((R + G + B)/3) (2)
S = I − M in(R, G, B)/3 (3)
The following figures 3,4 and 5 show the H,S and I images
Fig. 1: Process Architecture corresponding to the input images.
A. Iconic Information Retrieval
The icons should be selected in such a way that they convey the
information wholly as well as the user is not bombarded with too
many icons to confuse him as well as preventing the redundancy in
icon selection.
The icons are arranged in a hierarchical manner so the the query
Fig. 3: H images
is generated with minimum number of keystrokes and also it is
convenient for the user to understand and operate.
The query is generated from the selected icons and then fed to the
system. The relevant information is retrieved from the database in
accordance with icons selected for query generation.
B. Disease diagnosis using image processing techniques
1) Image Acquisition: The samples of the infected rice leaves Fig. 4: S images
have been collected from google images.
Fig. 2: Input Sample Image Fig. 5: I images
2) Pre-processing Steps: As a pre-processing step the images
used for training the system have been normalized to 200*200 size 4) Binary Saturated Mask Generation: Binary saturated mask is
and are enhanced by increasing brightness and contrast. generated by thresholding the saturation image. Suppose that the
intensity histogram corresponding to an image, f(x,y) is composed of
3) RGB to HSI Conversion: The RGB images are then converted light objects on a dark background, in such a way that object and
to the HSI model(more suitable for color description).The three background pixels have intensity values grouped into two dominant
components of the HSI model(H,S and I) are separated. modes. One obvious way to extract the objects from the background is
to select a threshold, T, that separates these modes. Then, any point(x,y)
The RGB,CMY and other similar color models are not well in the image at which f(x,y) is greater than T is called an object point,
suited for describing colors in terms that are practical for human otherwise, the point is called a background point [7].
interpretation. For example, one does not refer to the color of
an automobile by giving the percentage of each of the primaries 5) Hue Image Masking With BSM: The hue image is then masked
www.ijascse.org Page 27
March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
with the binary saturated image(in order to isolate further regions of phase mainly consists of two steps namely spot isolation and spot
interest in the hue image). extraction. Often a segmented image consists of a number of spots.
Figure 6 shows the result of masking of Hue image with the Binary In order to extract features from individual spots, it is necessary to have
Saturated Mask. an algorithm that identifies each spot.
6) Histogram Generation: A histogram of the image produced by To identify the spots, we label each spot with a unique integer
the product of the hue image and the binary saturated image is then and the largest integer label gives the number of spots in the image.
produced indicating the localization of the spots in a certain region. Such identification algorithm is called component labeling. To
The histogram of a digital image with intensity levels in the recognize the images categorically, several features have to be
range(0,L-1) is a discrete function identified for an image. The following features have been extracted
from the images.
(a) Major Axis-The major axis points are the two points in an object
where the object is more elongated and where the straight line
drawn between these two points is the longest.Major axis points
are calculated by all possible combinations of perimeter pixels
where the line is the longest. The length of the major axis is
Fig. 6: Hue Image Masking With BSM
given by:
M ajorAxisLength = sqrt((x2 − x1)2 + (y2 − y1)2 ) (5)
h(r
k
) = n
k
, (4)
where (x1,y1) and (x2,y2) are the coordinates of the two end
where r is the k intensity value and n is the number of pixels
k th k points of the major axis [8].
in the image with intensity r
k
[7]. Figure 7 shows the histogram
generated for the Hue image masked with BSM.
(b) Minor Axis-The minor axis is drawn perpendicular to the major
axis where this line has the maximum length. Once the end
points of the minor axis have been found, its length is given by
the same equation as the major axis length. It is also called the
object width [8].
(c) Bounding Box- The bounding box is defined by the smallest
rectangle which encloses the object.
The minimum area of such a bounding box is given by:
Fig. 7: Histogram
BoundingBoxArea = majorAxisLength∗minorAxisLength
(6)
7) Thresholding: The masked image is then segmented using the
(d) Eccentricity- Eccentricity is the ratio between the length of the
thresholding. Figure 8 shows the segmented image for the
short axis to the long axis.
corresponding input images.
Eccentricity = axisLengthShort/axisLengthLong (7)
The value of eccentricity is between 0 and 1.Eccentricity is also
called ellipticity with respect to minor axis and major axis of
the ellipse. If the major axis gets longer, eccentricity gets higher
Fig. 8: Thresholding [8].
8) Spot Detection Using Component Labeling: The spots bound-
(e) Perimeter-Perimeter is an important feature of an object. Contour
aries are then detected using the image component labeling. Figure
based features which ignore the interior of a shape, depend on
9 shows a section of component labelling done.
finding the perimeter or boundary points of the object [8]. The
perimeter of an object is given by the integral as follows:
9) Feature Extraction: The purpose of the feature extraction is
to reduce the image data by measuring certain features or properties
of each segmented region such as color,shape and texture. This
T = x (t) + y (t)dt (8)
www.ijascse.org Page 28
March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
on the same line. Similarly, in three dimensions the convex hull
is in general the minimal convex polyhedron that contains all
the points in the set.
The following table shows some of the features values of the
images.
Class Area Major axis Minor axis Eular No.
Leaf Blast 4 3.44 1.69 1
Leaf Blast 5 4.25 1.94 1
Brown Spot 19 6.96 3.86 1
Brown Spot 11 4.49 3.28 1
10) System Training: This paper uses a feed forward neural
Fig. 9: Component Labeling
networks with two hidden layers.
The system is trained for two classes (leaf blast and brown spot).
(f) Solidity- In simple terms density is mass per unit volume.
The system is trained using 25 images for each kind of the disease.
But in two dimensional image objects this can be defined
When a new image is fed to the system, it is classified under
as the ratio between the area and convex area of the same
one of the two classes of the diseases. The system produces an
object:
output showing the name of the disease in the crop and its class.
Solidity = Area/C onvexArea (9)
IV. RESULT
For a solid object or cell, this value is 1, while the value is The icon based interface is shown in the figure 12 where the
lower for an object or cell having a rough perimeter or an object two broad categories for the selection are available. The selection
which has holes [8]. of one of the icons will lead to the display of a sub-category of
(g) Euler Number-Connected components and holes are important icons and so on. Finally a detailed description of the desired query
topological features and they are found out by the Euler number. will be presented in front of the user. System includes features like
The Euler number ( E ) is defined by the number of connected expert login, admin login, expert sign up, password security,
components (C ) and holes ( H ) : contact us, feedback etc. Figure 10 and 11 shows the iconic
interface and the categories under which the fields have been
E = C − H (10) categorised respectively.
It is an important topological descriptor. This simple topological
feature as said before is invariant to translation, rotation and
scaling [8].
(h) Orientation- The overall direction of the shape. The direction of
the major axis can be used as an (approximate) orientation for
the object [8].
(i) Area-The number of pixels in the shape [8].
(j) Extent Measure-Extent measure also called as rectangularity
ratio, has a value between 0 and 1.When this ratio has the
value 1 then the shape is perfectly rectangular [8], is computed as
Fig. 10: Crop Icons
Extent = SpotArea/BoundingBoxArea (11)
(k) Diameter-Diameter of a spot is measured as
Diameter = Sqr t((4 ∗ Area/P I) ) (12)
(l) Convex Hull-If the points are all on a line, the convex hull
is the line segment joining the outermost two points. In the planar
case, the convex hull is a convex polygon unless all points are
www.ijascse.org Page 29
March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
Fig. 11: Categories
Additional features include-
Blog-Those users who can read and write can directly interact with
the experts through the blog. Fig. 13: Final Result Displayed to the User
Figure 12 shows the interface for the blog.
Email-The user can also send an email to the experts regarding
his query by simply click on a button.
To develop a full-fledged and ready to use system, some of issues
have to be handled in icon selection, arrangement and image
database handling. The advantage of using icons for query generation
is that single icon is sufficient for the generation of a query but
the disadvantage is that misinterpretation of the icon can lead to
incorrect query formation. So, it is to be concluded that the use of
iconic interface is very efficient as well as effective especially in
the context of the naive users but its proper implementation is more
difficult and complex task than it appears.
In the context of image processing section, back propagation
neural network method has been used for disease classification in
the rice crop for mainly two diseases. Morphological image
descriptors have been used for image feature extraction. 25 images
related to each category are used for training the system and 20
Fig. 12: Blog Screen images of each category used for testing the system. Each spot on an
image is taken as a separate input sample, thus increasing the
FAQ-Users can look for their queries directly in the frequently
number of input sample to 1008, and for testing each spot on an image is
asked questions. Figure 13 shows the interface for the final detailed
also taken as separate instance, and voting scheme is used to classifying the
description shown to the user.
image in one of the two categories. The accuracy of the system based on
the testing performed under this scheme comes out to be 89.23%.
V. Conclusion and Future work
This paper provides an interface model for digitally illiterate users,
specially farmer to retrieve information through internet efficiently
and effectively. It also enables farmers to identify the disease in their
crop; its cause and symptoms using digital image processing and
pattern recognition instantly without waiting for an expert to visit the
www.ijascse.org Page 30
March 31
International Journal of Advanced Studies in Computer Science & engineering
IJASCSE, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2014
farms and identify the disease. Experimental results prove the 494.
[3] Qing Yao;Zexin Guan;Yingfeng Zhou;Jian Tang; Yang Hu;Baojun Yang.
effectiveness of the proposed research.
Application of support vector machine for detecting rice diseases using
shape and color texture features . International Conference on Engineer-
The image processing section currently shows the results based its ing Computation,2009.79-83.
training by 25 images belonging to each category of the disease. The [4] Phadikar,S.;Sil,J.Rice Disease Identification using Pattern Recognition
Techniques . Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Computer
results can be further improved by increasing the number of images
and Information Technology,2008.420-423.
used for training of the system. The system currently works for a [5] Libo Liu; Guomin Zhou.Extraction of the Rice Leaf Disease Image
section of the crop and can be further extended for other crops as well Based on BP Neural Network.International Conference,2009.1-3.
[6] Al Bashish, D.; Braik, M.; Bani-Ahmad, S. A Framework for Detec-
as fruits and vegetables. Icon optimization by using synonyms and
tion and Classification of Plant Leaf and Stem Diseases .International
thesaurus is planned as the future work. Conference on Signal and Image Processing,2010.113-118.
[7] Gonzalez and Woods Digital Image Processing.Pearson Publication
REFERENCES Third edition.407-408,443-444,
[8] Bjorn Olsson.Shape Analysis and Measurement for the HeLa cell
[1] Song Kai;Liu Zhikun;Su Hang;Guo Chunhong., “A Research of maize disease classification of cultured cells in high throughput screening .
image recognition of Corn Based on BP Networks” Third International [9] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literacy in India.
Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation,2011.246-249. [10] Maiti, S;Dey,S.;Samanta,D.Development of Iconic Interface to Retrieve
[2] Shen Weizheng;Wu Yachun;Chen Zhanliang;Wei Hongda.Grading Information from Internet .IEEE students technology symposium,3-4
Method of Leaf Spot Disease Based on Image Processing .International april,2010.276-281.
Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering,2008.491-
www.ijascse.org Page 31
