Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
56th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems, CIRP CMS ‘23, South Africa
Information-based Preprocessing of PLC Data for Automatic Behavior
Modeling
Brandon K. Saia,*, Jonas Grama, Thomas Bauernhansla,b
aFraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Engineering and Automation IPA, Nobelst. 12, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
bInstitute of Industrial Manufacturing and Management, IFF, University of Stuttgart, Germany
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 711 970-1918; E-mail address: brandon.sai@ipa.fraunhofer.de
Abstract
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) offer immense optimization potential for manufacturing processes through the availability of multivariate time
series data of actors and sensors. Based on automated analysis software, the deployment of adaptive and responsive measures is possible for time
series data. Due to the complex and dynamic nature of modern manufacturing, analysis and modeling often cannot be entirely automated. Even
machine- or deep learning approaches often depend on a priori expert knowledge and labelling. In this paper, an information-based data
preprocessing approach is proposed. By applying statistical methods including variance and correlation analysis, an approximation of the
sampling rate in event-based systems and the utilization of spectral analysis, knowledge about the underlying manufacturing processes can be
gained prior to modeling. The paper presents, how statistical analysis enables the pruning of a dataset’s least important features and how the
sampling rate approximation approach sets the base for further data analysis and modeling. The data’s underlying periodicity, originating from
the cyclic nature of an automated manufacturing process, will be detected by utilizing the fast Fourier transform. This information-based
preprocessing method will then be validated for process time series data of cyber-physical systems’ programmable logic controllers (PLC).
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 56th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2023
Keywords: Data Preprocessing; Behavioral Modeling; OEE Optimization
1. Introduction important features. This data size reduction makes it possible
to gain a deeper understanding of underlying production
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) have the potential to processes. Additionally, we utilize the fast Fourier transform
revolutionize industrial manufacturing processes through the (FFT) to classify the data into real origin intervals or process
collection of multivariate time series data from actors and cycles. This allows identifying of underlying periodic patterns
sensors. However, the complex and dynamic nature of modern in the data that originate from the cyclical nature of automated
manufacturing poses a significant challenge to automated production processes. The proposed information-based
analysis and modeling of the data. In this paper, we propose an preprocessing method will be validated using process time
information-based data preprocessing approach that aims to series data from a CPS’ programmable logic controllers (PLC).
improve the accuracy and efficiency of automated behavior Through this validation, we aim to demonstrate the
modeling for industrial manufacturing processes. The proposed effectiveness of the proposed approach in providing a deeper
approach employs statistical methods such as variance and understanding of underlying production processes and its
correlation analysis to prune the dataset to retain only the most
2212-8271 © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0)
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 56th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2023
10.1016/j.procir.2023.09.038
566 Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571
ability to improve the accuracy and efficiency of automated 2.3. Feature selection with correlation analysis methods
behavior modeling for industrial manufacturing processes.
Extensive research has been performed regarding feature
2. Related work selection based on sparse methods like Cox regression and
Elastic net regression modeling in various ways. Additionally,
Much research has been carried out in time series data filter methods like random forest modeling for feature
preprocessing. In the following, some of the most important evaluation have been tested [12]. In the field of filter methods,
approaches relating to this papers main goal are shown. The sum of squared canonical correlation coefficients are used for
focus is set on feature selection through variance and feature ranking and a novel algorithm has been developed [13].
correlation-based methods and time series periodicity Making use of an AutoEncoder (AE) with a concrete layer [14],
detection. detecting correlated features has been a success. The AE is
trained to reconstruct the time series data from a subset of
2.1. Time series data processing selected features [11]. Furthermore, the Merit Score for time
series data conducting feature subset selection based on the
Various ways for preprocessing time series data with regard correlation patterns of single feature classifier outputs has been
to machine learning have been assessed, including proposed. The score ranks feature importance if a good feature
normalization, scaling and detrending of time series data [1]. subset contains features highly correlated to the class but
McGovern applies moving averages and frequency domain uncorrelated to each other [15]. Diez et al. evaluate certain
processing via Fourier transform to time series data [2]. Panja linear and non-linear correlation methods for feature selection.
et al. conduct research for choosing a fraction of data points for This includes the linear absolute Pearson coefficient and the
a regression model without losing any features or trends in the non-linear geometric mean of marginal entropies which is the
data. This involves dividing the dataset along the axis into mutual information of features normalized by the tightest
equal parts, along a specific curve or at certain change points bound [16]. Dewaskar et al. utilize iterative hypothesis testing
[3]. Further research is carried out in preprocessing of web to identify stable bimodules, which satisfy a natural stability
usage or Internet of Things (IoT) data, with a strong focus on condition. Bimodules are groups of features with significant
the processing queues and pipelines. Additionally, real time aggregate cross-correlation and can be used for feature
processing and denoising of the data are evaluated [4, 5]. selection of time series data [17]. Further research is being
performed in the field of Graph Neural Network (GNN)
2.2. Feature selection with variance-based methods modeling to identify feature correlations. Feature correlation
aggregation is proposed to learn the second order information
Yan and Tang conduct research for feature screening by from feature correlation between a node and its neighbors to
utilizing a data-slicing technique to construct a new index enable improved feature generation by the GNN [18].
called the fused mean-variance. They use a mathematical
approach to measure feature dependencies and importance [6]. 2.4. Time series periodicity detection
Insolia et al. developed a feature selection and outlier detection
method for regression problems. Feature selection is performed For periodicity detection, a sliding window approach is
through a robust class of non-concave penalization methods proposed by Dłotko et al. Per window subset, the homology
estimating the importance of each data point. While being and its L1 and L2 norms are computed and portioned into k
robust, this method relies on manual parameter fine-tuning [7]. equispaced points via k-means clustering or min-max
Kamalov proposes an approach for feature selection based on transformation of the data [19]. Periodicity detection is
orthogonal variance. First decomposing model output variance performed based on an optimization algorithm of Dynamic
into orthogonal components based on feature subsets, then Time Warping (DTW), Robust DTW and a time series slicing
making use of variance decomposition to evaluate features [8]. algorithm as well. This concept improves efficiency and
Sadeghyan proposes feature selection through Sensitivity robustness to noise and outliers for recognition of periodicity
Analysis (SA) based on the work of Lauret et al. [9], where a in time series [20]. Barnet et al. present a Gaussian Mixture
ranking system is provided for all the existing features in order periodicity detection algorithm iteratively using an Integral
to remove the redundant features. A neural network is fitted to Convolution approach. The algorithm calculates a point-wise
the features of the data set and probability density functions are estimate of the explained data for a given integrated subset,
assigned with the ranges of variation for each feature. The which is tested as an underlying periodicity of the time series
features’ relevance is determined by analyzing the Fourier data [21]. In terms of statistical detection of periodic signals,
decomposition of the model output variance [10]. Nuisance the Bayesian- and the frequentist period search have been
features, which are at maximum loosely related to the evaluated. The Bayesian approach computed the Bayes factor
underlying structure of the data have been identified utilizing based on marginal likelihood to determine whether a feature is
the data graphs Laplacians eigenvectors as the Laplacian score periodic, while the frequentist approach relies on hypothesis
[11]. testing based on the likelihood ratio, computed through ratios
of likelihood maxima [22]. Periodicity detection is also
achieved by utilizing the multifrequency periodogram based on
Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571 567
least-square regression and hypothesis testing. This is periodic production cycles. The proposed preprocessing
optimized for efficiency, parallelism and robustness against method generates a-priori knowledge of the CPS without the
noise in the data [23]. Covino et al. conduct periodicity need for extensive modeling or expert knowledge.
detection based on Gaussian processes [24, 25]. These
processes are generative models and an infinite dimensional 3.1. Automated feature selection
extension of the multivariate Normal distribution. A Bayesian
nonparametric approach is provided, where the mean is set to Automated production equipment in general entails multiple
none, a linear or quadratic function and the covariance is a sensors and control-parameters. When logging the generated
positive semidefinite function. The covariance kernel is chosen data from the PLC, many of these signals are not necessary to
based on a priori knowledge of the time series data. Further gain information about the underlying production process. The
research is performed in the identification of periodic signals goal is to filter the signals with a high probability of having a
through the Auto Correlation function [26, 27]. An automated marginal impact on the eventual modeling or analysis of the
period detection method has been developed relying on the data. Since many PLC signals are only used occasionally or not
discrete Fourier transform. The time series data is transformed at all, a variance threshold per signal is proposed. The PLC time
into the frequency domain, and the frequency domain series data is described as 𝑋 =(𝑥 ,…,𝑥 )∈ ℝ𝑛×𝑑 with 𝑛
1 𝑛
probability density function is solved to recognize periodicity. samples and dimensionality 𝑑. The dataset consists of 𝑑
This function depends on amplitude, frequency, phase and feature columns 𝑐 =(𝑐 ,…,𝑐 ), where 𝑐 is the 𝑘-th column
1 𝑑 𝑘
least-squares fitting of trigonometric functions to the of the dataset 𝑋. In modern complex automated production
transformed data [28–30]. In addition to uniform Fourier sites, d will be a high number that this approach tries to
transforms, non-uniform fast Fourier transforms for unevenly diminish prior to modeling or further usage of the data. The
sampled data have been proposed [31–34]. Another advanced variance 𝜎2, the squared deviation of a value from the mean, is
technique based on the Fourier transform is the discrete Double calculated per feature column 𝑐 =(𝑎 ,…,𝑎 )∈ℝ𝑛×1, where
1 𝑛
Fourier transform for the detection of periodic patterns [35]. 𝑎 is the 𝑖-th element of a column.
𝑖
Resting upon the developments on the Fourier transform,
period detection can be conducted through Fourier-likelihood ∑n (a −μ)2 (1)
σ2 = i=1 i
periodograms. This is achieved by converting the time series in n
the frequency domain via the Fourier transform, computing the
periodogram [36], converting the values for each sample to Each feature with a variance lower than a certain
Gaussian likelihoods and taking the product of these across all threshold 𝑡ℎ𝑟 is subsequently removed, since a low variance
data points [37]. Human sleep cycle detection has been done reflects a menial rate of value alterations. Complementary, to
using cosine functions and a cosinor model [38] to describe further reduce the dimensionality of the dataset, highly
pseudo-periodical patterns [39]. correlated features will be removed. Through the utilization of
correlation analysis, redundant columns, that have low or no
3. Contributions impact on modeling or the analysis of the data, will be detected
[40]. The Spearman correlation coefficient 𝑅 is calculated to
𝑘𝑚
The information-based preprocessing approach of this determine the pairwise feature correlation of each dataset
paper, can be applied after standard processing of PLC time column 𝑐 with every other column 𝑐 . If the modulus of the
𝑘 𝑚
series data, like removing rows and columns with empty values correlation between two features exceeds a certain threshold,
and correctly naming the columns. PLC data consist of discrete one of the features is subsequently removed. First, the rank 𝑟
𝑖
values from sensors and actors of the underlying CPS. Each per element is computed for each column. Per column, the
data source (sensor or actor) is referred to as feature in the time lowest element is assigned the rank 𝑟 =0, while the highest is
0
series data, represented as a column. Additionally, these assigned 𝑟 =𝑖. In the case of a value tie, each of the tied
𝑛
sources will be referred to as signals in the PLC data stream. elements is assigned the average of the ranks that would have
been assigned to all the tied values. Then the Spearman
Table 1: Model dataset for PLC time series data. correlation is computed for each pair of features with n
elements and the rank value 𝑟 for each.
𝑖𝑘
Timestamp Actuator Sensor 1 Sensor 2 Sensor 3
(h:mm:ms) 1
∑𝑛 (𝑟 −𝑟̅)(𝑟 −𝑟̅̅̅)
3:10:000 0 0 0 0 𝑅 = 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖𝑘 𝑘 𝑖𝑚 𝑚 (2)
𝑘𝑚
3:10:500 0 1 0 0 √ ∑𝑛 𝑖=1 (𝑟 𝑖𝑘 −𝑟̅ 𝑘 )2 ∗√ ∑𝑛 𝑖=1 (𝑟 𝑖𝑚 −𝑟̅̅ 𝑚 ̅)2
𝑛 𝑛
3:11:000 0 1 0 0
3:12:000 1 1 0 0
Both described methods ensure a faster data handling due to
dimensionality reduction without the loss of crucial
This approach aims to enable methods in generating process information.
understanding through modeling or analyzing by removing the
least important PLC signals and dividing the dataset into the
568 Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571
3.2. Resampling the event-based PLC time series data Per column, each value with an amplitude below the top 30%
is discarded. Additionally, a certain percentage of frequency
Due to the PLC having a maximum data rate for the values starting from zero is being treated as anomalies and
connection interfaces, PLC time series data is often generated discarded as well. This is based on the assumption that the
event based. Even though the data rate might be sufficient for underlying production process will have anomaly extended
data sampling at a higher frequency, in production cycle times during periods of maintenance, setup-time or
environments, it is important not to overload the PLC with holidays. Now the local maxima of the remaining amplitudes
secondary tasks due to failures having a high impact on costs. are identified and their related data samples collected. Based on
Because modern supervisory control and data acquisition the FFT and this algorithm, the cycle time 𝑇 of the PLC time
(SCADA) systems often realize uniform data logging, this step series datasets production process is the inverse of the
is not necessary for each production system. In the process of frequency with the corresponding highest amplitude. Utilizing
event-based time series data sampling, the next dataset row this information, the responsible signal for the strongest
consisting of one value per PLC signal is generated whenever frequency can be identified. This signals pattern together with
one of the signal values just changes. As a result, the dataset is the cycle time can be used to partition the PLC time series into
non-equidistant or non-uniform because the time delta t the respective production cycles.
between the event-based generated timestamps of the rows
varies. Many analyzing or modeling methods work with non- 4. Application and validation
uniform data, but some will not, for example, the cycle
detection method proposed in chapter 3.3. In order to enable To validate the proposed method and present possible
data analysis and modeling approaches depending on uniform applications, the method has been applied to a synthetic and a
data, a simple upscaling method for event-based time series real PLC time series dataset.
data X is proposed, to create the uniform time series dataset
X̂=(x̂ ,…,x̂ )∈ ℝn̂×d. In the uniform time series dataset, the 4.1. Synthetic dataset
1 n̂
time interval between each row will be the same. The new
timedelta t̂ for X̂ describing the time amount between two
measurements is set to the PLC cycle time of the data
generating PLC. This leads to the uniform dataset measuring
frequency f̂ of how many rows of data are generated per
second.
1000 (3)
𝑓̂ =
t̂
Now the dataset X̂ is resampled starting from row x which
1
is the same in X and X̂. Until the final timestamp of x is
n
reached, a new row x̂ is generated. Due to the logic of the
î
event-based data, every row x̂ matches the values of x̂ until
î+1 î
the next event-timestamp at x i is reached and the values change Figure 1: Frequency analysis of the synthetic dataset. The x-axis shows
to the of x. occurring frequencies in the data, the y-axis measures the frequencies
i
importance via the amplitude.
3.3. Periodic cycle time detection
To simulate a controlled environment in order to validate the
Based on the uniform time series dataset 𝑋̂, a robust proposed information-based preprocessing approach, an event-
production process cycle time detection method is developed.
The goal is to gain information about the distinction and
duration of the periodic production cycles to support further
analysis prior to or after modeling the data. First, each column
𝑐̂ of the uniformed PLC time series 𝑋̂ is transformed into
𝑘̂
frequency domain 𝐹 by utilizing the 1-dimensional discrete
𝑘
uniform fast Fourier transform (FFT) [41]. The algorithm
computes every occurring periodic frequency in the time series
data as waves and maps it together with its importance
amplitude, such that 𝐹 =(𝑓,…,𝑓 )∈ ℝ𝑛̂×2. Each element 𝑓
𝑘 1 𝑛̂ 𝑖̂
consists of a frequency value in 𝐻𝑧 depicting the detected
periodicity and an amplitude value to illustrate the importance
of this periodic frequency for the dataset. In order to analyze
the most important periodicity of the dataset, which is the Figure 2: Transformation of the frequency analysis into the time domain. The
production cycle time, a further analyzing method is proposed. strongest detected period was 90 seconds, visible at the highest amplitude
point.
Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571 569
based synthetic dataset has been generated. This time series signals were dropped out of the dataset for low variant
dataset consists of 35 features over a week of simulated behavior. Another signal has been dropped due to high
production cycles and an optimum cycle time of 90 seconds. correlation, reducing the data dimensionality to 12 features. To
Each cycle consists of 17 different states. The dataset was match the uniform PLC sampling, the data has then been
generated with 10% noise. In this context, noise is the presence resampled to match 10ms of time between measurements. The
of acyclic or infrequent activities in the sensor and actor data. cycle detection approach identified the optimum cycle time of
By applying the automated feature selection, one signal was about 93s. The software identified the strongest cyclic signal as
removed due to low variance, and one was removed due to high either signal 5 or signal 10.
correlation with other signals. Then the dataset was resampled Even though both signals show the same strong cyclic
by upscaling it to match 20𝑚𝑠 of time between measurements. behavior, in reality, only signal 5 is used as the cycle starting
Subsequently, the cycle time detection was realized. The signal in the PLC software.
software could detect the optimum cycle time of
90seconds and no information was lost by the automated 5. Conclusion
feature selection. Additionally, the strongest cyclic signal was
identified as signal 25, which can now further be used to This paper proposes a method for preprocessing cyber-
partition the dataset into production cycles. physical systems time series data. The approach automatically
generates the needed information regarding the underlying
4.2. Real PLC dataset process and dataset, which otherwise would have been
manually analyzed by experts. The processed data enables
modeling or simulation approaches due to lower
dimensionality and insight into the exact periodic behavior.
The method shows good capability of time series data
dimensionality reduction and reliably detects periodic
production cycle times. Future work may improve the detection
of the strongest cyclic signal to ensure an optimized dataset
partitioning into cycles. Additionally, the data resampling
approach presented in 4.2 can be automated as well. Further
automation potential is to dynamically and automatically set
the threshold values for the feature-selection and the
percentage of discarded values during the cycle time detection.
This information-based preprocessing approach will be
Figure 3: Frequency analysis of the real-world production dataset. The x-axis continuously applied and optimized in the future.
shows occurring frequencies in the data, the y-axis measures the frequencies
importance via the amplitude.
Appendix A. Additional outputs for the production
dataset validation
For true validation of the preprocessing method, the
approach was tested in a real CPS production environment.
Figure 5: Distribution of the importance (y-axis) of the frequency spectrum
(x-axis) for signal 5.
Figure 4: Transformation of the frequency analysis into the time domain. The
strongest detected period was about 93 seconds, visible at the highest
amplitude point.
This time series dataset has been recorded event-based as well.
It consists of 25 features, logged over one week. The optimum
cycle time is 93 seconds with each cycle consisting of 14
different states. Using the automated feature selection, 12 PLC
570 Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571
[15] Kathirgamanathan B, Cunningham P. Correlation Based
Feature Subset Selection for Multivariate Time-Series
Data: arXiv; 2021.
[16] Diez G, Nagel D et al. Correlation-based feature
selection to identify functional dynamics in proteins.
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation
2022;18: p. 5079–5088.
[17] Dewaskar M, Palowitch J, He M, et al. Finding groups
of cross-correlated features in bi-view data: arXiv; 2020.
[18] Zhou J, Zhang T, Fang P, et al. Feature Correlation
Aggregation: on the Path to Better Graph Neural
Networks: arXiv; 2021.
[19] Dłotko P, Qiu W, Rudkin S. Cyclicality, Periodicity and
the Topology of Time Series: arXiv; 2019.
[20] Song X, Wen Q, Li Y, et al. Robust Time Series
Figure 6: Feature correlation matrix of the production dataset after removal of Dissimilarity Measure for Outlier Detection and
the low variance features.
Periodicity Detection: arXiv; 2022.
[21] Barnett E, Kaiser O, Masci J, et al. Generative Models
for Periodicity Detection in Noisy Signals: arXiv; 2022.
References
[22] Baluev RV. Comparing the frequentist and Bayesian
[1] Daniel F. Financial Time Series Data Processing for periodic signal detection: rates of statistical mistakes
Machine Learning: arXiv; 2019. and sensitivity to priors. Monthly Notices of the Royal
[2] McGovern S. Spectral Processing of COVID-19 Time- Astronomical Society 2022;512: p. 5520–5534.
Series Data: arXiv; 2020. [23] Baluev RV. Detecting multiple periodicities in
[3] Panja P, Asai P, Velasco R, et al. Data Processing observational data with the multifrequency
Protocol for Regression of Geothermal Times Series periodogram. Astronomy and Computing 2013;3-4: p.
with Uneven Intervals: arXiv; 2019. 50–57.
[4] Chitraa V, Davamani A. S. A Survey on Preprocessing [24] Rasmussen CE, Williams CKI. Gaussian Processes for
Methods for Web Usage Data: CoRR; 2010. Machine Learning. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
[5] Xu C, Yang HH, Wang X, et al. On Peak Age of Press; 2005.
Information in Data Preprocessing enabled IoT [25] Covino S, Tobar F et al. Detecting the periodicity of
Networks: CoRR; 2019. highly irregularly sampled light-curves with Gaussian
[6] Xiao-Dong Y, Jin-Han X, Xian-Wen D, et al. Fused processes: the case of SDSSJ025214.67-002813.7.
Mean-variance Filter for Feature Screening: arXiv; Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
2016. 2022;513: p. 2841–2849.
[7] Insolia L, Chiaromonte F, Li R, et al. Doubly Robust [26] Krishnan S, Markowitz AG et al. Detection of periodic
Feature Selection with Mean and Variance Outlier signals in AGN red noise light curves: empirical tests on
Detection and Oracle Properties: arXiv; 2021. the Auto-Correlation Function and Phase Dispersion
[8] Kamalov F. Orthogonal variance decomposition based Minimization. Monthly Notices of the Royal
feature selection. 182nd ed.: Expert Systems with Astronomical Society 2021;508: p. 3975–3994.
Applications; 2021. [27] Sai BK, Mayer YT et al. Dynamic Data Acquisition and
[9] Lauret P, Fock E et al. A node pruning algorithm based Preprocessing for Automatic Behavioral Modeling of
on a Fourier amplitude sensitivity test method. IEEE Cyber-physical Systems. Procedia CIRP 2021;104: p.
transactions on neural networks 2006;17: p. 273–293. 363–369.
[10] Sadeghyan S. A new robust feature selection method [28] Kallinger T, Reegen P et al. A heuristic derivation of the
using variance-based sensitivity analysis: arXiv; 2018. uncertainty for frequency determination in time series
[11] Shaham U, Lindenbaum O, Svirsky J, et al. Deep data. Astronomy & Astrophysics 2008;481: p. 571–574.
Unsupervised Feature Selection by Discarding Nuisance [29] Shaju KY, Reegen P, Thayyullathil RB. Automated
and Correlated Features. 152nd ed.: Neural Networks; period detection from variable stars' time series
2022. database; 2010.
[12] Spooner A. Ensemble feature selection with clustering [30] Collins Jackson A, Lacey S. The discrete Fourier
for analysis of high-dimensional, correlated clinical data transformation for seasonality and anomaly detection of
in the search for Alzheimer's disease biomarkers: arXiv; an application to rare data. Data Technologies and
2022. Applications 2020;54: p. 121–132.
[13] Zhang S, Wang T, Worden K, et al. Canonical- [31] Gumerov NA, Duraiswami R. Fast Multipole Method
Correlation-Based Fast Feature Selection: arXiv; 2021. based filtering of non-uniformly sampled data: arXiv;
[14] Abid A, Balin MF et al. Concrete Autoencoders for 2016.
Differentiable Feature Selection and Reconstruction. [32] Chang P, Pienaar E et al. Malliavin-Mancino estimators
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on implemented with non-uniform fast Fourier transforms.
Machine Learning 2019:444-453. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 2020;42:B1378-
Brandon K. Sai et al. / Procedia CIRP 120 (2023) 565–571 571
B1403. Springer; 1967. p. 20.
[33] Fessler JA, Sutton BP. Nonuniform fast fourier [39] Chen S, Sun X. Validating CircaCP: a Generic Sleep-
transforms using min-max interpolation. IEEE Wake Cycle Detection Algorithm. IEEE EMBS
Transactions on Signal Processing 2003;51: p. 560–574. International Conference on Biomedical & Health
[34] Shimobaba T, Kakue T et al. Non-uniform sampled Informatics (BHI) 2019: p. 1–4.
scalar diffraction calculation using non-uniform fast [40] García S, Luengo J, Herrera F. Data preprocessing in
Fourier transform. Optics Letters 2013;38: p. 5130. data mining. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 2015.
[35] Chechetkin VR, Lobzin VV. Detection of Large-Scale [41] Cooley JW, Tukey JW. An Algorithm for the Machine
Noisy Multi-Periodic Patterns with Discrete Double Calculation of Complex Fourier Series, In: Oppenheim
Fourier Transform. Fluctuation and Noise Letters AV, editor. Papers on Digital Signal Processing.
2020;19: p. 2050019. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press; 1969.
[36] Schuster A. On the investigation of hidden periodicities
with application to a supposed 26 day period of
meteorological phenomena. Journal of Geophysical
Research 1898;3: p. 13.
[37] Murakami YS, Jennings C et al. PIPS, an advanced
platform for period detection in time series. Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 2022;514: p.
4489–4505.
[38] Halberg F, Tong YL et al. Circadian System Phase —
An Aspect of Temporal Morphology; Procedures and
Illustrative Examples, In: Mayersbach H von, editor.
The Cellular Aspects of Biorhythms. Berlin, Heidelberg:
