Preprint accepted for publication at KI - Ku¨nstliche Intelligenz
Special Issue on Developmental Robotics - DOI: 10.1007/s13218-020-00696-1
Intelligent behavior depends on the ecological niche
Scaling up AI to human-like intelligence in socio-cultural environments
Manfred Eppe∗ · Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Abstract This paper outlines a perspective on the fu- PYO: That’s an interesting question. First of all, I
ture of AI, discussing directions for machines models would like to say that I am not a big fan of the strong
of human-like intelligence. We explain how develop- versus weak AI concept. I would say that for many
mental and evolutionary theories of human cognition people, when they speak about ’weak AI’, they refer
shouldfurtherinformartificialintelligence.Weempha- to techniques allowing to detect shallow relations be-
size the role of ecological niches in sculpting intelligent tweenanumberofquantities,andusedtopredictwhat
behavior,andinparticularthathumanintelligencewas will happen in the future without really understanding
fundamentally shaped to adapt to a constantly chang- what’s happening. Whereas maybe some other people
ing socio-cultural environment. We argue that a major call ’strong AI’ some kind of imaginary AI that is a bit
limit of current work in AI is that it is missing this liketheconceptofAGI–ArtificialGeneralIntelligence.
perspective, both theoretically and experimentally. Fi- Theyintuitivelydefineitasanintelligencethatisgoing
nally, we discuss the promising approach of develop- to be good at everything and be able to solve problems
mental artificial intelligence, modeling infant develop- of unbounded complexity.
ment through multi-scale interaction between intrin- I don’t like this distinction because, first of all, I
sically motivated learning, embodiment and a fastly don’t think there is some kind of natural ordering of
changing socio-cultural environment. This paper takes intelligencesasissuggestedbythe’strongversusweak’
the form of an interview of Pierre-Yves Oudeyer by idea,whichissomekindoflinearscaleinwhichsomeAI
Mandred Eppe, organized within the context of a KI wouldbeontopofanother.Ithasthesameproblemsas
- Ku¨nstliche Intelligenz special issue in developmental tryingtoordertheintelligencesofanimals.Andsecond,
robotics. I don’t like it because I think that the AGI concept,
behind the strong AI concept, is something that does
Keywords developmental AI · general artificial
not exist. Why so?
intelligence · human-like AI · embodiment · evolution ·
language · socio-cultural skills
“[W]hat counts is [...] to realize that each kind of
intelligence is suited to its environment.”
1 Is it useful to talk about strong and weak AI?
Idobelieve,ifyoulookattheworldoflivingorgan-
ismsinnature,thatthereisnotonescaleofintelligence:
rather there is a diversity of intelligences. And each
ME: So what’s the difference between strong and weak
formofintelligenceisadaptedtotheecologicalnichein
AI?WhatthebroaderpublicunderstandsbyAIismore
which it is living. It has been evolving over quite long
the weak AI. So what is it that makes AI strong, and
time to solve a particular family of problems that ap-
how is that related to your research?
pear in their particular ecological niche. For example,
ants have to solve problems which are very different
∗ManfredEppe
from the ones solved by dogs which are very different
DepartmentofInformatics
Universita¨tHamburg,Germany from the ones solve by birds which are very different
E-mail:eppe@informatik.uni-hamburg.de from the problems solved by humans. And there is no
1202
raM
11
]IA.sc[
1v96760.3012:viXra
2 ManfredEppe∗,Pierre-YvesOudeyer
natural ordering for this. So for example, the problems cialgamesofinteraction.Thisisakeydimensionofthe
that ants are solving for being able to live in very ex- human environment, which I think is central to under-
tremeclimaticandchemicalenvironmentsissomething stand the human intelligence. And any machine aimed
thathumansareverybadat.Ifyouwanttodoanorder- tobe’intelligent’inthehumanworldwouldneedtobe
ingfromthepointofviewofants,humanintelligenceis abletodealwiththisrichfastlychangingsocio-cultural
notsogood.Anditisthesameformanyotheranimals. environment.
For example, you have animals which need to have a
very developed intelligence about figuring out the odor
of things because they need to evolve in environments
“Any machine aimed to be ’intelligent’ in the human
where vision is basically useless. And so they need to
world would need to be able to deal with this rich fastly
usesensesrelatedtosmellinginamuchmoredeveloped changing socio-cultural environment.”
way than human beings. Again, from the point of view
oftheseanimals,theintelligenceofotheranimalswith-
out those senses is basically very low. So what counts
Something that comes with cultural evolution is
isactuallynotsomuchtoclassifytheintelligencesona
that humans are basically a species which is continu-
single scale but to realize that each kind of intelligence
ouslymakingdiscoveriesandinventions.Thisisthanks
is suited to its environment.
to the use of language, which is one of the main carrier
One key question behind this is: what is special
of cultural evolution. Language allows to transmit in-
about human intelligence? Rather than AGI, I prefer
ventions to others, but it is also used as a tool to make
the concept of human-like intelligence (HLI), which is
discoveries2).That’sveryimportantbecauseoneofthe
actuallywhatsomepeopleunderstandintuitivelywhen
key properties ofhumancognitionis theability tocon-
speakingaboutAGI.Buthumanintelligenceisnotgen-
tinuouslyinventnewtools.Notonlyphysicaltools,like
eralatall.Therearemany,manyproblemsatwhichwe
rakes or knives, but also cognitive tools such as nat-
are very bad.
ural languages, or formal languages, like mathematics.
Thesecognitivetoolshaveenabledtheratchetingeffect
of cultural evolution, which has enabled individuals to
2 Human-like intelligence
really expand the range of their discoveries. I think the
combinationofculturalevolutionandtheabilitytocon-
Basically, to understand what is special about human
tinuously invent new tools, in particular new cognitive
intelligence, I think one needs to look at what is spe-
tools, is something that is very, very peculiar to the
cial about the ecological niche of the environment in
human species.
which we are living. I think there are a few properties
Humanintelligenceisbasicallyoptimizedtobeable
which are pretty important to understand the intelli-
to continuously adapt to its evolving cultural environ-
gence of humans. It’s that their environment is charac-
ment.Andthisculturaladaptationinturnleadstofur-
terizedbyothers,bythesocialinteractionswithothers,
ther change of the environment, forming a loop that is
and that these social interactions continuously change
atthecoreofanopen-endedgrowthofcomplexity.This
through cultural evolution. Cultural evolution is basi-
probably leads to the need to be able to invent cogni-
callythecapabilityofhumansocietiestonotonlylearn
tive tools, to learn and negotiate new rules of social
novelconcepts,novelideas,inventnewtools,butalsoto
interaction.Understandingthemechanismsinthisself-
sharetheseinventionsandtransmitthemtofuturegen-
organizingcomplexsystemisoneoftheobjectivesofmy
erations.Thisprocessoftransmissioncauseshighspeed
approach to AI. I view AI as a tool that can enable us
change of the social, cognitive, emotional environment
tounderstandthehumanspeciesbetter.Asacognitive
to which all humans are exposed. And this continu-
tool enabling me to understand something about our
ally evolving socio-cultural environment is essential in
defining the problems humans need to solve1. It’s not human environment, and enabling me to grasp some of
thespecialpropertiesofhumans:theircapabilitytoin-
like the ants, for example. The ants also have the rich
vent and use cognitive tools to understand better their
social environment, but it is not constantly changing.
(social) environment, and transmit them to others.
Thereisnoculturalevolutioninants.Thisiscausinga
special family of problems that humans need to solve,
and in particular young humans who need to be able
2 Fordiscussionsonvariouswaysinwhichlanguageisused
to learn continuously new rules for new games, new so- asacognitivetool,see[32,6,10];Foranartificialintelligence
architecturemodelingtheuseoflanguageasacognitivetool
1 Fordiscussionsabouttheco-evolutionofhumancognition fordrivingcreativediscoveriesincuriosity-drivenexploration,
andsocio-culturalstructures,see[31,8, 13,33] see[7]
Intelligentbehaviordependsontheecological niche 3
3 The role of embodiment whichembodimentislessessential.Inthatcase,maybe
embodiment is going to be less a problem and also less
a solution because the world in which those entities
“I don’t think we can say very general statements about
are living is less relevant to physics. I don’t think we
whether embodiment is needed for intelligence. I think
it’s rather that for some particular organisms in cansayverygeneralstatementsaboutwhetherembod-
certain environments embodiment is absolutely central, iment is needed for intelligence. I think it’s rather that
and for other kinds of organism, in some other kinds for some particular organisms in certain environments
of environments, maybe it is less central.”
embodimentisabsolutelycentral,andforotherkindsof
organism, in some other kinds of environments, maybe
it is less central.
ME: Does this imply that an intelligent agent actu-
ally requires a body? For example, can there be intelli-
ME: You say that social interaction like language
genceinachatbot?Achatbotdoesn’treallyhaveabody,
and speech is, at least for human-level intelligence [...],
it has actions and perception and so on. But where are
a necessary property. Would you say that some artifi-
the limits and what kind of properties must an agent
cial agent could be intelligent without any social inter-
have to develop intelligent behavior? What’s the mini-
action?
mum?
Again, I would reformulate the other way around.
Again, I think we need to put in perspective the
I think that one of the key problems that human in-
question of whether something is needed for intelli-
telligence is solving is dealing with social interaction.
gence. I think it needs to be reframed in the context of
Of course, you can imagine some other worlds. Actu-
the families of problems that a particular intelligence
ally,thereareanimalsonthisplanetthathavearather
is supposed to solve in a particular family of environ-
poor social life and still they are able to do amazing
ments. For example, human-like intelligence happens
things. It doesn’t mean that they are not intelligent.
in the physical world and it’s about controlling physi-
From the point of view of their environment, they are
cal bodies in a physical environment with social beings
extremely intelligent, they are extremely adaptive, it’s
in addition to physical objects.
justthattheydon’tneedtosolvethisproblemofsocial
Thisembodimentisafundamentalpartoftheprob-
interaction. As I was saying initially, one of the spe-
lem solved by the intelligence. But it also is a funda-
cific problems that is implied by being able to live in a
mental part of the solution because the body itself has
culturally evolving system is the ability to adapt con-
evolved through phylogenetic evolution in order to fa-
tinuously to changes in the environment and to invent
cilitate the capacity of the organism to adapt to the
new things.
problems of its environment [26]. For example, if we
look at language and we want to understand how hu-
mans understand language, we really quickly see that
4 Towards artificial learning systems with
thepropertiesofembodimentandhowitisstructurally
human-like intelligence
alignedwiththeenvironmenthasafundamentalimpor-
tance in the way to conceptualize meanings 3. Many of
the meanings that are expressed by language are de- “I think what is missing in the current picture is an
fined in terms of the relationships between the body’s ecosystem [...] for evaluating machine learning systems
repertoireofactionsandtheeffectstheycanproducein [...] with respect to [...] targeting human-like
intelligence.”
the environment. Meanings of sentences and meanings
of words are relational entities that relate properties
of the body and action repertoire with properties of It’s interesting that right now a big focus of the AI
the environment. Obviously, a system which has not a community is on machine learning, studying how arti-
body with the fundamental properties of the specific ficial agents might be able to learn novel things. The
bodyofhumanswillhaveverybigdifficultiestounder- frontier of this field is, in a way, life-long learning, to
stand language in the same way as humans understand continuously learn new things in an extended period
language. of time. I think what is missing in the current picture
Maybe in some other environments, there are enti- is an ecosystem that is relevant for training and then
tieswhichhavetosolvedifferentfamiliesofproblemsin evaluating those machine learning systems and assess-
ing their relevance, for example, with respect to tar-
3 See [18], as well as [5] for a research roadmap in devel-
geting human-like intelligence. If you look, for exam-
opmental robotics studying the embodied language learning
perspective. ple, at most of the benchmarks that currently exist in
4 ManfredEppe∗,Pierre-YvesOudeyer
thefield ofdeepreinforcement learning, whichis about 5 Interdisciplinary synergies between AI and
how to make sequences of decisions to solve problems: cognitive sciences
How many of them involve solving complex behavioral
problems related to social interaction? Very little! It’s
“This emerging convergence between developmental
only very recently that people have began to become
robotics and machine learning, which I like to call
interested in language grounding in this community of ”developmental machine learning”, or ”developmental
machine learning. Things are developing, but it is still AI”, is really exciting!”
very primitive as compared to the real social problems
that are solved by humans.
ME: Obviously, neuroscience, psychology, and cog-
ME:Itwouldbeaveryvaluablecontribution,forin- nitive science has learned a lot from AI and vice versa.
stance, for the development of robotics, to develop new What do you think are the biggest chances here? What
benchmark environments which feature this open-ended does AI have that neurosciences, psychology, and cog-
learning, right? nitive sciences can learn most from. Or the other way
around. Can you give an example?
Yes. Developmental robotics, long before machine
learning, has for more than two decades being focus- Therearemanythings 4.Iwillusemyownworkas
ing on those problems of how machines can adapt and anexample.Psychologistshavebeendiscussingtheidea
learn interaction with social peers [4, 16, 30]. People that the brain might be motivated to explore novel sit-
have studied for those two decades, for example, how uationsorchangingsituationsformany,manydecades.
children can learn basic social interaction skills such as Already in the ’40s and the ’50s, there were psycholo-
jointattention[3,14,21].Also,theproblemoflanguage gistslikeDanielBerlynewhoproposedtoconceptualize
grounding has been studied already 20 or 30 years ago, curiosity [2]. They proposed that it might be a very
even before developmental robotics started as a field fundamental mechanism to understand how children
[28, 29, 27]. grow up and develop intelligence. For many decades,
What’s interesting to see is that, initially, those this concept remained expressed in a verbal manner,
concepts were rather studied from the point of view without being very well formalized. As a consequence,
of really modeling directly human intelligence. I think it was little considered in psychology, neuroscience and
this was really the right way to go. Generally, ma- AI,eventhoughBerlyne,Piagetandotherssaidthatit
chinelearninghasignoredalltheseconceptualthinking, is probably very important for the long-term cognitive
which is mixing computational modeling, developmen- development of children. Also, it had not clearly been
tal psychology, developmental cognitive neuroscience. identified what could be its potential role in learning
They have ignored this for a very long time and they and development.
are slowly rediscovering many of those old concepts, Withafewlabsintheworld,whenwebeganatthe
which are very, very fundamental. Hopefully now, by beginning of the 21st century to study and to model
leveraging and rediscovering these concepts, there is a the concept of curiosity, what we were really interested
greatopportunityforAI:verymodernandefficientma- in was to understand the underlying mechanisms and
chine learning techniques that exist, but which so far howtheycoulddriveaspectsofthedevelopmentofcog-
have not been developed and assessed in the right en- nition and sensorimotor skills 5. The first thing we did
vironmental context, could now be adapted and used wastoformalizethespaceofpotentialmechanisms[23]
in the right ecosystem of problems that are relevant and then to develop a series of experiments to try to
for humans. This emerging convergence between devel- understand the consequences of using these kinds of
opmental robotics and machine learning, which I like mechanisms. We discovered that one form of curios-
to call ”developmental machine learning”, or ”develop- itymechanisms,whichwenamedthe’learningprogress
mental AI”, is really exciting! hypothesis’ had very interesting properties[15]: these
mechanismsbasicallyleadthebraintoexplorelearning
situations(e.g.actions,goalsorpeople)whichenableto
improve predictions or control about the world. What
we actually discovered is that these curiosity mecha-
nisms, when you use them in an embodied system and
you let this system run for a long period of time, it
4 For areview,see[22]
5 See[1,25] forearlymodeling worksonthistopic
Intelligentbehaviordependsontheecological niche 5
self-organizesdevelopmentaltrajectorieswithphasesof systems. For example, when we look right now at deep
increasing complexity that have special properties not reinforcementlearningsystems7,theyneedsomeforms
preprogrammed in the system. At the beginning, there ofepisodicmemories.Forexample,intheformofreplay
wasnoblueprintoftheseschedules.Theseschedulesare buffers with other forms of more parametric memories
reallysomethingemergentandwewereabletodiscover or more declarative memories. That’s a bit like what’s
that they share many structural properties with infant happening in the human brain.
development of sensorimotor and cognitive skills. For
example, for the case of vocal development, we were
able to show that if you put this system into an artifi-
“You have many people right now who are focusing on
cialvocaltract,itwillautomaticallygenerateacurricu- enabling an AI system to master a very complicated
lum of learning [20]. The phases are very, very similar adult-like language, but very little people are actually
trying to see how one can enable complex social
to the phases of vocal development we observed in in-
reasoning capacities in artificial systems, which are
fants. We later conducted other experiments showing
there well before language in infants.”
how such curiosity could lead to the discovery of com-
plexformsoftooluse,alsowithsimilaritieswithhuman
developmental trajectories [9].
I think that this is something that was initially in-
Basically,thiskindofworkenablednotonlytogen-
spired a lot from cognitive sciences. There are other
erate precise hypotheses about the mechanisms of cu-
things which cognitive sciences, and psychology, and
riosity.Italsoenabledtoshow,toproposethehypothe-
neurosciencehaveknownforalongtimeandwhichare
sisthatthemoment-to-momentmechanismofcuriosity,
still very little exploited in AI and machine learning.
whenunrolledonthelong-terminanorganism,enables
For example, if we go back to the question of cultural
self-organization of developmental structure, with the
evolutionandsocialinteraction,weknowthatthereare
emergenceofmajorbehavioralandcognitivetransitions
important complex skills that are developed by very
[24]. This could actually explain some of the develop-
young children. For example, the ability to build men-
mentalstructuresthatweknowareexistinginhumans.
tal models of others, to have a motivation to help oth-
Before,therewasnotheorythatcouldexplainhowthey
ers, and to be altruistic in social interaction. Michael
arise.Now,afterwe’vedonethiscomputationalmodel-
Tomasello[31],amongothers,hasshownthatvery,very
ingwork,wehavethosehypotheses.Wearenotsureit’s
early on, infants who have very limited understanding
actually working like this in humans, but now, we have
of language, they can already understand in a very ad-
thosehypothesisandwecandesignnewexperimentsto
vancedmannersocialsituationsinwhichtheyguessthe
test those predictions. And this is exactly what us and
goals of others. They can anticipate what others are
otherlabsintheworldarecurrentlydoing6.Thisisan
going to do next, and they can spontaneously propose
exampleofhowAIcanbeusedasatooltounderstand
to help them. These are incredible feats of the human
better how humans are working.
mind. It is amazing that humans are doing this even
before they master advanced language.
“What we actually discovered is that these curiosity
You have many people right now who are focusing
mechanisms, when you use them in an embodied system
and you let this system run for a long period of time, it onenablinganAIsystemtomasteraverycomplicated
self-organizes developmental trajectories with phases of adult-like language, but very little people are actually
increasing complexity that have special properties not trying to see how one can enable complex social rea-
preprogrammed in the system.”
soning capacities in artificial systems, which are there
wellbeforelanguageininfants.Bytheway,maybevery
I think also AI has been taking already a lot of in-
important for language grounding, it is not only key
sights from cognitive sciences for many decades and
to understand how meanings are grounded in relations
many others are still to be used. For example, a lot
between the body and physical objects, but also in re-
in the past has been done about the structure of mem-
lations between oneself and others in a social context
ories. Cognitive science, psychology and neuroscience
with joint goals. Language is a tool that enables hu-
have been knowing for a very long time that in the hu-
mans to achieve joint goals. To understand language
manbrain,therearedifferentformsofmemories.These
and its use, it seems it’s quite important that agents
have different functionalities and different structures.
understand the concept of joint goals and coordination
These ideas have inspired several generations of AI re-
with others.
searchers to put different kinds of memories in their
6 See[11,17]forreviewsofrecentdevelopmentsinpsychol- 7 See[12]forareviewonhowrecentworkindeeplearning
ogyandneuroscience takes inspirationfromneuroscience.
6 ManfredEppe∗,Pierre-YvesOudeyer
6 Future directions and conclusion which states that this bottleneck in the working mem-
ory of humans might be some kind of constraint that
has pushed or caused in some way the emergence of a
“I have the feeling that there is something to discover
number of cognitive tools like language, compositional-
about the importance of cognitive bottlenecks.”
ity, and all the tools in our cognitive toolkit that en-
abled the combinatorial discoveries that we make.
Ihavethefeelingthatthereissomethingtodiscover
ME: Thanks a lot, and I have one concluding ques-
abouttheimportanceofcognitivebottlenecks.Wehave
tion. If you were a young person just starting to study,
huge computational resources, and many people in AI
having some knowledge about computer science and
focus on trying to exploit it. But on the contrary, if we
maybe psychology, what would you start right now? If
have some constraints on the computational resources,
you knew nothing of what you know now, or maybe
thenmaybeitcanhavesomeadvantageintermsofde-
only a little bit, what would be the topic that you would
velopinganarchitecturewhichisgoingtobeverypow-
tackle?
erful in the environment of humans. What I’m saying
here is still not very precise, but I feel there is some-
That’s a tough question because there are so many
thing very interesting to study here. That would be an
interesting things. There are dozens of PhD topics I
example of a direction that could be very fruitful to
wouldliketodo.Thedifficultthingwouldbetochoose
study further.
one. Rather than giving you the one I think is best,
maybeIgiveyouanexampleofwhatIhavebeenthink-
ME: OK, I conclude then that more PhD students
ingaboutwithmyteam,andwhichIthinkisveryinter-
should start working in this field and maybe be not so
esting research. Some of the properties of human cog-
overwhelmedbyAIandmachinelearninghype,butalso
nition are a bit mysterious and strange. For example,
look more into the deeper cognitive mechanisms that
if you look at properties of working memory, there is a
make humans intelligent.
bottleneck in human working memory. We cannot hold
andreasonwithmorethanfourtosix,sevenobjectsor
Yes, exactly.
concepts at the same time. Doing that reasoning with
moreobjectsorconceptsorentitiesisvery,verydifficult
ME: Great! Thank you very much for the interview!
for our brain. This is very strange because our brain is
sopowerful.Wehavelong-termmemorythatisable to
retainliterallyahugeamountofthings,waymorethan
a machine is able to do today. We are also able to do
some amazing long-term reflection and inferences, but 7 Short Bios
yetatthesametime,wecannotholdinourheadmuch
morethanfive,sixobjects.Whyisthisso?Especially,if Pierre-Yves Oudeyer is a research director at Inria
you look at animals, for example, if you look at certain and head of the Flowers lab at Inria, Univ. Bordeaux
non-humanprimates.Manyofthemhaveamuchbetter and Ensta-ParisTech since 2008. The Flowers team
working memory than we have. Maybe you know this hosts around 25 researchers at the crossroads of AI,
experimentwithmonkeys,whereyouputtheminfront machine learning, developmental robotics and cogni-
ofascreenandyoushownumbersatdifferentscrambled tive sciences. From 1999 until 2007, he was a perma-
places of the screen from 1 to 10. You show this image nent researcher in Sony Computer Science Laboratory.
for a few seconds and then it’s blank. Then you only He studies developmen-
show the empty squares on the screen and you need tal autonomous learning
to type in the numbers they contained initially. This and the self-organization
is completely impossible to do for humans, but that’s of behavioral and cog-
veryeasyformanymonkeys.Theycanremember,fora nitive structures in hu-
short amount of time, a larger number of entities than mans and machines. In
what we can. Yet humans have language, humans have particular, he studies ex-
culturalevolution,humanshaveinventedmathematics, ploration in large open-
humanshaveliterature,and poetry.Ihaveanintuition ended spaces, with a fo-
about this, and I’m not the only one. There is a num- cus on autonomous goal
ber of people who have also outlined this intuition, for setting,intrinsicallymoti-
example,thefamousprimatologistTetsuroMatsuzawa. vated learning, and how
He has proposed the cognitive tradeoff hypothesis [19], this can automate curriculum learning. With his team,
Intelligentbehaviordependsontheecological niche 7
hepioneeredcuriosity-drivenlearningalgorithmswork- environmentasacompositionofabstractconcepts,and
inginrealworldrobots(usedinSonyAiboandQriohu- toperformdecision-makingbasedonsuchabstractrep-
manoid robots), and showed how the same algorithms resentations?Heisparticularlyactiveinthefieldsofre-
can be used to personalize sequences of learning activ- inforcement learning, self-supervised learning and nat-
ities in educational technologies deployed at large in urallanguageprocessing,combiningsymbolicandneu-
schools.Hedevelopedtheoreticalframeworkstounder- ral network-based methods of artificial intelligence to
stand better human curiosity and its role in cognitive model cognitive processes. Manfred Eppe has inter-
development,andcontributedtobuildaninternational viewed Pierre-Yves Oudeyer about his perspective on
interdisciplinaryresearchcommunityonhumancurios- the future of more human-like artificial intelligence.
ity. He also studied how machines and humans can in-
vent, learn and evolve speech communication systems.
PY Oudeyer has received multiple international
References
awards, such as the 2018 Prize Inria from Na-
tional Academy of Science (France), the 2016 Lifetime 1. Gianluca Baldassarre and Marco Mirolli. Intrin-
Achievement Award from the Evolutionary Linguistics sically motivated learning in natural and artificial
association, and an ERC Starting Grant (2009). He is systems. Springer, 2013.
associate editor of IEEE CIS Newsletter on Cognitive 2. Daniel E Berlyne. Conflict, arousal, and curiosity.
andDevelopmentalSystems,theIEEETransactionson McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1960.
CognitiveandDevelopmentalSystemsandFrontiersin 3. Cynthia Breazeal and Brian Scassellati. Robots
Neurorobotics. He is also actively contributing to dis- that imitate humans. Trends in cognitive sciences,
seminatesciencetowardsthegeneralpublic,bywriting 6(11):481–487, 2002.
popular science articles and participating in radio and 4. Angelo Cangelosi and Matthew Schlesinger. De-
TV programs as well as science exhibitions. velopmental robotics: From babies to robots. MIT
Dr. Manfred Eppe is a principal investigator and se- press, 2015.
nior researcher at the Knowledge Technology Group 5. AngeloCangelosi,GiorgioMetta,GerhardSagerer,
at Universit¨at Hamburg, Germany, since 2017. From Stefano Nolfi, Chrystopher Nehaniv, Kerstin Fis-
2015 to 2017 he was a postdoctoral research fel- cher, Jun Tani, Tony Belpaeme, Giulio Sandini,
low at the International Computer Science Insti- Francesco Nori, et al. Integration of action and
tute at the University of California at Berkeley, language knowledge: A roadmap for developmen-
USA. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the tal robotics. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Barcelona, Mental Development, 2(3):167–195, 2010.
Spain, from 2014 to 2015 and obtained his Ph.D. 6. AndyClark. Magicwords:Howlanguageaugments
from the University of Bremen, Germany, in 2014. human computation. Language and thought: Inter-
Manfred Eppe is a reg- disciplinary themes, pages 162–183, 1998.
ular reviewer and author 7. C´edric Colas, Tristan Karch, Nicolas Lair, Jean-
of papers for conferences Michel Dussoux, Cl´ement Moulin-Frier, Peter Ford
in robotics, artificial in- Dominey,andPierre-YvesOudeyer. Languageasa
telligence, machine learn- cognitive tool to imagine goals in curiosity-driven
ing and cognitive science, exploration. In Neurips 2020, 2020.
including IROS, ICDL- 8. MerlinDonald. Origins of the modern mind: Three
Epirob, ICANN, IJCAI, stages in the evolution of culture and cognition.
Transactions on Cogni- Harvard University Press, 1991.
tive and Developmental 9. S´ebastien Forestier and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. A
Systems, IJCNN, Fron- Unified Model of Speech and Tool Use Early De-
tiers in Robotics and AI, velopment. In 39th Annual Conference of the Cog-
and Artificial Intelligence. He has led or is lead- nitive Science Society (CogSci), 2017.
ing several research projects funded by the Volkswa- 10. DedreGentner.Languageascognitivetoolkit:How
gen Stiftung, the German Academic Exchange Service language supports relational thought. American
(DAAD)andtheGermanResearchFoundation(DFG). psychologist, 71(8):650, 2016.
Manfred Eppe studies the links between Cognitive Sci- 11. Jacqueline Gottlieb and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. To-
ences and Artificial Intelligence. His main interest is wardsaneuroscienceofactivesamplingandcurios-
inrepresentationlearningandconceptgrounding:How ity. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 19(12):758–770,
can embodied (robotic) agents learn to represent their 2018.
8 ManfredEppe∗,Pierre-YvesOudeyer
12. Demis Hassabis, Dharshan Kumaran, Christo- 26. RolfPfeiferandJoshBongard.Howthebodyshapes
pher Summerfield, and Matthew Botvinick. the way we think: a new view of intelligence. MIT
Neuroscience-inspired artificial intelligence. Neu- press, 2006.
ron, 95(2):245–258, 2017. 27. Deb K Roy and Alex P Pentland. Learning words
13. CeciliaHeyes. Pr´ecisofcognitivegadgets:Thecul- from sights and sounds: A computational model.
tural evolution of thinking. Behavioral and Brain Cognitive science, 26(1):113–146, 2002.
Sciences, 42, 2019. 28. Jeffrey Mark Siskind. Grounding language in per-
14. Frederic Kaplan and Verena V Hafner. The chal- ception. Artificial Intelligence Review, 8(5-6):371–
lenges of joint attention. Interaction Studies, 7(2): 391, 1994.
135–169, 2006. 29. Luc Steels. Language games for autonomous
15. Frederic Kaplan and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. In robots. IEEE Intelligent systems, 16(5):16–22,
searchoftheneuralcircuitsofintrinsicmotivation. 2001.
Frontiers in neuroscience, 1:17, 2007. 30. Jun Tani. Exploring robotic minds: actions, sym-
16. Frederic Kaplan, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Ben- bols, and consciousness as self-organizing dynamic
jaminBergen. Computationalmodelsinthedebate phenomena. Oxford University Press, 2016.
over language learnability. Infant and Child Devel- 31. Michael Tomasello. The cultural origins of human
opment: An International Journal of Research and cognition. Harvard university press, 2009.
Practice, 17(1):55–80, 2008. 32. L.S.Vygotsky. ToolandSymbolinChildDevelop-
17. Celeste Kidd and Benjamin Y Hayden. The psy- ment. In Mind in Society, chapter Tool and Sym-
chology and neuroscience of curiosity. Neuron, 88 bol in Child Development, pages 19–30. Harvard
(3):449–460, 2015. University Press, 1978. ISBN 0674576292. doi:
18. George Lakoff, Mark Johnson, et al. Philosophy 10.2307/j.ctvjf9vz4.6.
in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge 33. Andrew Whiten and David Erdal. The human
to western thought, volume 640. Basic books New socio-cognitive niche and its evolutionary origins.
York, 1999. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
19. Tetsuro Matsuzawa. Symbolic representation of Biological Sciences, 367(1599):2119–2129, 2012.
numberinchimpanzees. Current opinion in neuro-
biology, 19(1):92–98, 2009.
20. Cl´ement Moulin-Frier, Sao Mai Nguyen, and
Pierre-YvesOudeyer. Self-organizationofearlyvo-
cal development in infants and machines: the role
of intrinsic motivation. Frontiers in psychology, 4:
1006, 2014.
21. Yukie Nagai. Mechanism for cognitive develop-
ment. InCognitive Neuroscience Robotics A,pages
51–72. Springer, 2016.
22. Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. On the impact of robotics
in behavioral and cognitive sciences: from insect
navigation to human cognitive development. IEEE
TransactionsonAutonomousMentalDevelopment,
2(1):2–16, 2010.
23. Pierre-YvesOudeyerandFredericKaplan. Whatis
intrinsic motivation? a typology of computational
approaches. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 1:6, 2009.
24. Pierre-YvesOudeyerandLindaBSmith. Howevo-
lution may work through curiosity-driven develop-
mental process. Topics in Cognitive Science, 8(2):
492–502, 2016.
25. Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Fr´ed´eric Kaplan, and Ver-
ena V Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for au-
tonomous mental development. IEEE transactions
on evolutionary computation, 11(2):265–286, 2007.
