Learning Multimodal Transition Dynamics for
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Thomas M. Moerland, Joost Broekens, and Catholijn M. Jonker
Department of Computer Science
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
{T.M.Moerland,D.J.Broekens,C.M.Jonker}@tudelft.nl
Abstract. In this paper we study how to learn stochastic, multimodal
transition dynamics in reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. We focus on
evaluating transition function estimation, while we defer planning over
this model to future work. Stochasticity is a fundamental property of
many task environments. However, discriminative function approxima-
torshavedifficultyestimatingmultimodalstochasticity.Incontrast,deep
generative models do capture complex high-dimensional outcome distri-
butions. First we discuss why, amongst such models, conditional varia-
tionalinference(VI)istheoreticallymostappealingformodel-basedRL.
Subsequently, we compare different VI models on their ability to learn
complex stochasticity on simulated functions, as well as on a typical
RL gridworld with multimodal dynamics. Results show VI successfully
predictsmultimodaloutcomes,butalsorobustlyignoresthesefordeter-
ministicpartsofthetransitiondynamics.Insummary,weshowarobust
method to learn multimodal transitions using function approximation,
which is a key preliminary for model-based RL in stochastic domains.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a succesful learning paradigm for sequential de-
cision making from data in agents and robots. A long standing debate in RL
researchhasbeenwhethertolearn‘model-free’or‘model-based’(Figure1)[31].
Model-basedRLhasshownsomeimportantbenefits,mostnoteworthyincreased
dataefficiency[7],thepotentialfortargetedexploration[30],andnaturaltransfer
between tasks when only the reward function changes. Model-based RL consists
of two steps: 1) transition function estimation through supervised learning, and
2) (sample-based) planning over the learned model (Figure 1, green arrows).
Each step has a particular challenging aspect. For this work we focus on a key
challenge of the first step, stochasticity in the transition dynamics, while we de-
fer the second step, planning (under uncertainty), to future work (see Sec. 6 as
well).
Stochasticity is an inherent property of many environments, and increases
in real-world settings due to sensor noise. Transition dynamics usually combine
both deterministic aspects (such as the falling trajectory of an object due to
gravity) and stochastic elements (such as the behaviour of another car on the
7102
guA
8
]LM.tats[
2v07400.5071:viXra
Fig.1. Two types of reinforcement learning. Model-free RL (blue) directly learns a
behavioural policy, while model-based RL (green) also attempts to learn the environ-
ment’stransitiondynamics.Learningthistransitionmodelallowstheagenttopredict
future states and thereby allows the agent to plan.
road). Our goal is to learn to jointly predict these. Note that stochasticity has
many forms, both homoscedastic versus heteroscedastic, and unimodal versus
multimodal. In this work we specifically focus on multimodal stochasticity, as
this should theoretically pose the largest challenge.
To learn such transition models, we require high-capacity function approxi-
matorsthatcanpredictnext-statedistributionsofcomplexshape.Thisproblem
is not yet accurately solved by currently used methods in model-based RL, like
tabular learning [3] (which does not scale to high-dimensions), linear function
approximation [1] with Gaussian noise [20], random forests [14], or deep feed-
forward networks trained on mean-squared error (MSE) [25] (See also Sec. 2).
ApotentialsolutiontothisproblemareDeepGenerativeModels(DGM)[13],
as they are non-linear function approximators that can learn complex outcome
distributions and scale to high-dimensions. In Section 2 we compare different
DGM’s on their theoretic appeal for stochastic model learning in the RL set-
ting, and identify conditional Variational Inference (VI) as the most promising
solution.
The remainder of the paper then continues as follows. In Section 3, we for-
mally describe conditional variational inference with different types of discrete
and continuous latent variables. In Section 4 we empirically compare the differ-
ent approaches on a simulated function and on a typical RL tasks. Our results
show that VI is accurately able to discriminate deterministic from stochastic
aspects of the transition dynamics. We also show how the RL agent manages to
learn an accurate transition model while solving a task. Finally, Sections 5 and
6 connect our work to related literature and identify opportunities for future
work, respectively.
All code to reproduce the results in this paper is publicly available at www.
github.com/tmoer/multimodal_varinf.
Fig.2.Multimodaloutcomedistributionp(y|x)(blueline)forasimple1Dobservation
space. Training on a mean-squared error will deterministically predict the conditional
mean (dashed line), which implicitly assumes a uni-modal Gaussian outcome (green
line).
2 Challenge of Multimodal Transitions
We will write x ∈ X for the current state and action, and y ∈ Y for the next
state we want to predict. We are interested in models that can approximate
distributions p(y|x) with multiple local maxima (‘modes’). A cardinal example
of such a distribution is shown in Figure 2 (blue line).
Discriminativefunctionapproximators,forexampletrainedatmean-squared
error (MSE) loss, fail at this task. The point prediction of the function approx-
imator will be the conditional expectation of the outcome distribution (Fig. 2,
dashed line). Obviously, point estimate predictions will never be a good method
to approximate a distribution, but they have actually been frequently applied
in model-based RL work [25].1 Clearly, a unimodal outcome distribution will
neither solve the multimodality problem (Fig. 2).
AmixtureofGaussiansperoutcomedimensionwouldneithersolvetheprob-
lem. Full covariance matrix Gaussians clearly do not scale to high-dimensional
domains(suchas[24]),whilediagonalGaussianswouldlooseallcovariancestruc-
tureinthepredictions.Moreover,mixturemodelsaretedioustotrain.Whatwe
require are models that 1) flexibly approximate joint distributions of complex
(multimodal) shape and 2) scale to high-dimensions.
Wehypothesizethegroupofdeepgenerativemodels(DGN)[13]areapromis-
ing candidate, as they fulfill both requirements. For model-based RL, where we
will use the models to sample (a lot of) traces, we additionally require that the
model is 1) easy to sample from, and 2) ideally allows for planning at an ab-
stract level. Following the DGN taxonomy by Goodfellow [13] (Figure 3), we
1 Forexample,Ohetal.[25]showsMSEtrainingdoesworkwellinhigh-dimensional,
deterministic domains. However, for example inspecting their Ms. Pacman (a
stochastic game) predictions at https://youtu.be/cy96rtUdBuE, we see that the
predictions for the stochastic elements (ghosts) fail. The ghosts disappear when
they reach a corridor junction, where they stochastically choose in which direction
tocontinue.Thefeed-forwardnetworkpredictstheconditionalmeanofthesechoices,
which completely blurs the ghosts in a few frames.
Fig.3. Deep generative model taxonomy following [13].
now compare DGN models on their theoretical appeal for transition function
estimation.
Implicit density models, like Generative Adverserial Networks (GAN) lack a
clear probabilistic objective function, which was the focus of this work. Among
theexplicitdensitymodels,therearetwocategories.Change of variable formula
models, like Real NVP [9], have the drawback that the latent space dimension
must equal the observation space. Fully visible belief nets like pixelCNN [26],
whichfactorizethelikelihoodinanauto-regressivefashion,holdstate-of-the-art
likelihoodresults.However,theyhavethedrawbackthatsamplingisasequential
operation (e.g. pixel-by-pixel, which is computationally expensive), and they do
not allow for latent level planning either. Therefore, most suitable for model-
based RL seem approximate density models, most noteworthy the variational
auto-encoder(VAE)[19]framework.Thesemodelscanestimatestochasticityat
alatentlevel,allowforlatentplanning[33],areeasytosamplefrom,andhavea
clear probabilisticinterpretation.In the next section,wewill formally introduce
this methodology in the conditional setting, where the generative process of y is
conditioned on other variables x.
3 Conditional Variational Inference
Wewillfirstintroducetheconditionalvariationalauto-encoder(CVAE)[28].Our
goalistolearnagenerativemodelofa(possiblymultimodal)distributionp(y|x).
We assume the generative process is actually conditioned on latent variables z:
(cid:90)
p(y|x)= p(y|z,x)p(z|x)dz (1)
Here p(z|x) is the prior and p(y|z,x) is the generative model or ‘decoder’.
The stochastic latent variables z provide the flexibility to predict more complex
outcome distributions y. The posterior over z, p(z|y,x) is intractable in most
models of interest, for example deep non-linear neural networks. However, the
parameters of this distribution can be efficiently approximated with Stochastic
Gradient Variation Bayes (SGVB) [19], which uses a parametric recognition
or inference model q(z|y,x) to approximate the true posterior p(z|y,x). The
inference model learns a mapping from observations to latent space, providing
generalizationandtherebyamortizingthecostofinference(comparedtoMarkov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inference methods that needed computationally
expensive iterative procedures to estimate the latent variables per datapoint).
Fig.4.ConditionalVariationalAuto-Encoderasacomputationalprocess.Squaresare
deterministic,circlesareprobabilisticnodes.Left:Trainingprocedure.Duringtraining,
we sample z according to q(·|x,y), where q is parametrized by φ . The training loss
q
consists of two terms (indicated by the red dotted boxes): 1) the reconstruction loss
p(y|z,x), and 2) the KL-divergence between q(z|x,y) and p(z|x). The latter ensures
thattheposteriorq putsprobabilitymassatthesamepointsasthepriorp,effectively
actingasaregularizerinlatentspace.Wecomputez withthereparametrizationtrick,
where e can be any appropriate noise distribution. Right: Test procedure. At test
time,wecutawaytheinferencenetworkq,andinsteadsamplez accordingtotheprior
p(z|x). This allows us to make stochastic predictions for y.
WecanderiveavariationallowerboundL(y|x)onourdatalikelihoodp(y|x):
(cid:20) (cid:21)
p(y,z|x)
logp(y|x)≥E log
z∼q(z|x,y) q(z|y,x)
=E [logp(y|z,x)]−D [q(z|x,y)(cid:107)p(z|x)]=L(y|x;θ,φ) (2)
z∼q(z|x,y) KL
where θ denotes the parameters in the generative network, φ denotes the
parameters in the inference network and prior, and D denotes the Kullback-
KL
Leibler(KL)divergence.Wecaninterprettheleft-handtermofthelastequation
(logp(y|z,x)) as the negative reconstruction error, which measures how well we
reconstruct y after sampling z. The right-hand term (KL divergence) ensures
q does not diverge too much from the prior p. This acts as a regularizer, and
ensuresthatwecanattesttime(whenwedonotobservey)samplefromp(z|x)
instead of q(z|x,y).
In practice, we slightly modify the objective in Eq. 2, where we use impor-
tance sampling [4] to obtain a tighter bound, and minimize a different distance
function instead of the KL-divergence (namely α-divergence with α=0.5 [8]).
Details are provided in Appendix A.
3.1 Reparametrization
Forthisworkwefocusonvariationalmethodsthatreparametrizethedistribution
of q (z|y,x) to allow gradient-based training on a single computational graph.
φ
The trick works when we can write z as a function z = f ((cid:15),y,x), with f (·)
φ φ
a deterministic, differentiable function, and (cid:15) ∼ p((cid:15)) a noise distribution with
independent marginal.
Foracontinuousvariablez,thecardinalexampleisalocation-scaletransfor-
mationofastandardGaussiandistribution.Ifq (z|y,x)=N(z|µ (y,x),Σ (y,x)),
φ φ φ
then we can write
z =f ((cid:15),y,x)=µ (y,x)+Σ (y,x)·(cid:15), with (cid:15)∼N(0,1) (3)
φ φ φ
The gain is that we can now backpropagate through expectations of the
random variable z [19]:
∇ E [ξ(z)]=E (cid:2) ∇ ξ(f ((cid:15),y,x)) (cid:3) (4)
φ z∼qφ(z|x,y) (cid:15)∼N(0,1) φ φ
for some function ξ(·) of z. The right-hand term can then be approximated
with a Monte-Carlo estimate. This allows us to backpropagate through z (see
Fig.4,left),givingthevanillaconditionalvariationalauto-encoder(CVAE)with
Gaussianlatentvariables.Theoveralltrainandtestprocedureissummarizedin
Figure 4. We now consider two methods to improve the capacity of the latent z
distribution, that both could improve learning multimodal outcomes.
3.2 Discrete Latent Variables
As we want to model multimodal outcomes, it seems natural to consider dis-
crete latent variables. However, for the reparametrization trick to be applicable
we require the function f (·) to be differentiable, which is not possible for a
φ
discrete variable. It turns out we can get good estimates by making a smooth
approximation to the discrete loss [17,22].
Letω beanorderedsetofclassprobabilitiesofadiscretevariablez 2 withn
i i i
categories.WecandrawsamplesfromthisdistributionthroughtheGumbel-Max
trick:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
z =one-hot argmax[g +logω ] (5)
i j i,j
j∈[1..ni]
with g i.i.d. draws from a Gumbel(0,1) distribution3. Since argmax is not
j
differentiable, we can make a softmax approximation to the above equation:
exp((logω +g )/τ)
z = i,j j for j =1,..,n (6)
i,j (cid:80)ni
exp((logω +g )/τ)
i
o=1 i,o o
which is known as the Gumbell-Softmax [17] or Concrete [22] distribution.
The softmax temperature τ ∈ (0,∞) regulates the discreteness of the approx-
imation: for τ → 0, the samples effectively become one-hot, while for τ → ∞,
2 We use subscripts z to index the elements of the vector random variable z, and
i
double subscripts z to index the categories within one discrete random variable.
i,j
3 WecansamplefromaGumbel(0,1)distributionbysamplingu∼Uniform(0,1)and
computing g=−log(−log(u)).
the samples become uniform over the class categories. The above specification
allows us to use the reparametrization trick for discrete latent variables, as the
noise distribution g is now decoupled from the gradient path δz. Note that Eq.
δω
6isatypeofreparametrizationf (·)(asintroducedinSec.3.1,withg thenoise
φ
distribution and ω (x,y) the distribution parameters. In practice, we anneal τ
φ
from >1 to 0 over the course of training.
3.3 Transformations of Continuous Variables (Flow)
We already specified the reparametrization trick for spherical Gaussian latent
variables(Eq.3).AssphericalGaussiansmaybetoorestrictingformultimodal-
ity, we can increase the capacity of the latent layer by using transformations of
distributions for which we can track the density.
Toobtainmoreexpressivedistributionsforacontinuousrandomvariablez ∈
RD with known density q(z), we consider bijective smooth mappings h:RD →
RD with inverse h−1. We are interested in the distribution of the transformed
variablez(cid:48) =h(z).Aslongasweareabletoinverth,wecaneasilycomputethe
density of the transformed variable z(cid:48):
q(z(cid:48))=q(z) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)det( δh−1(z(cid:48)) ) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)=q(z) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)det( δh(z) ) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) −1 (7)
(cid:12) δz(cid:48) (cid:12) (cid:12) δz (cid:12)
whichisknownasthechange-of-variableformula.Ifwecanspecifyourneural
network to learn transformations which are easily invertible, we can construct
morecomplicateddistributionsbyrepeatedlyapplyingtheabovetransformation
(while being able to track the density). If we repeatedly apply a sequence of
transformations zL =hL◦...◦h1(z0) for some random variable z0 ∼q0(·), then
the density of the last variable zL can be computed as:
logqL(zL)=logq0(z0)− (cid:88) L log (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)det δzl (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (8)
(cid:12) δzl−1(cid:12)
l=1
The problem with the above transformation is that, especially for high-
dimensional domains, computing the determinant is computationally very ex-
pensive. An elegant solution appears from the observation that the determinant
ofatriangularmatrixissimplytheproductofitsdiagonalterms[9][18].There-
fore, given a random variable z of length D, we can specify the transformation
z(cid:48) =h(z) as:
z(cid:48) =z
1:d 1:d
z(cid:48) =t(z )+z(cid:48) (cid:12)exp(s(z )) (9)
d+1:D 1:d d+1:D 1:d
The Jacobian of the this transformation is:
δz(cid:48) (cid:34) I
d
0 (cid:35)
= δz(cid:48) (10)
δz d+1:D diag(exp(s(z )))
δz1:d 1:d
(cid:2)(cid:80) (cid:3)
Thedeterminantofthismatrixiseasilycomputedasexp s(z ) ) .Note
i 1:d i
that the t(·) (translation) and s(·) (scale) function can be arbitrarily complex
functions, for example deep, non-linear neural networks. In these transforma-
tions, we do not need to compute the determinant of s(·) or t(·) to track the
density of the random variable z(cid:48). Moreover, it is trivial to invert the above
transformation:
z =z(cid:48)
1:d 1:d
z =(z −t(z(cid:48) ))(cid:12)exp(−s(z(cid:48) )) (11)
d+1:D d+1:D 1:d 1:d
This allows us to use the change-of-variable formula of the previous section.
We effectively perform an auto-regressive transformation on the z variables. In
practice,werepeatedlymodifytheorderofthezvariablestohaveadifferentpart
of z transformed in each layer. In Fig. 4, we would apply these transformations
to a sample from q(z|x,y) before calculating the KL-divergence with p(z|x).
3.4 Enforcing Latent Variable Use
One of the challenges of training latent variable models is their tendency to
overfit the prior early in training. Initially, the likelihood term p(y|z,x) is rela-
tively weak. Therefore, the learning signal is dominated by the KL-divergence,
andstochasticoptimizationgetsstuckintheundesirableequilibriumq(z|y,x)≈
p(z|x).
To give a simple illustration, imagine y is strictly bimodal given a fixed x,
takingvaluey ory withp(y |x)=0.3andp(y |x)=0.7.Wefitalatentmodel
1 2 1 2
with a single binary variable z taking values z or z . Clearly, we want our prior
1 2
p(z|x)tolearnthedistribution{p(z |x)=0.3,p(z |x)=0.7}(assumingz maps
1 2 1
toy andz toy ,whichcanofcoursebeinterchanged).However,theinference
1 2 2
network q(z|x,y) has access to additional information, as it knows which y we
need to reconstruct. Therefore, if we present a datapair (x,y ), then we want
1
our latent distribution more like {q(z |x,y ) = 0.999,q(z |x,y ) = 0.001}, as
1 1 2 1
this ensures we make a good draw and good reconstruction. However, for this
datapoint this would incur a KL-penalty D (q(z|x,y )(cid:107)p(z|x)) ≈ 1.20. This
KL 1
illustrates how a good fitting VI model will necessarily incur some KL-cost.
A solution is to enforce each (set of) latent variables to encode a minimum
amount of information [18], i.e. force q(z|y,x) to at least have a KL-divergence
of λ from the prior p(z|x). The modified objective becomes:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
L˜(y|x)=E E (cid:2) logP(y|z,x) (cid:3) −
(x,y)∼M z∼q(z|y,x)
(cid:88)
Dz
max
(cid:18)
λ,E (cid:2) D [q(z |x,y)(cid:107)p(z |x)] (cid:3)
(cid:19)
(12)
(x,y)∼M KL j j
j=1
where D is the dimensionality of the latent space z, and M denotes a mini-
z
batch. Different solutions have been proposed, like KL annealing [29], but we
empirically found them to be less effective.
4 Results
We now test the different types of conditional variational inference, introduced
in the previous section, on two tasks. Evaluating generative model performance
is not straightforward, as standard metrics like mean-squared error (MSE) are
non-validformultimodaloutcomedistributions.Inthiswork,weevaluatei)the
log likelihood of a test set under the learned generative model (see Appendix
B), and (if possible) ii) we draw new data from the learned model and compute
KL divergences or Hellinger distances with respect to the true data generating
distribution. Training details and hyperparameters are described in Appendix
C.
4.1 Toy Problem
We generate a one-dimensional multimodal transition function by sampling x∼
Uniform(−1,1)andsamplingyfromaconditionalGaussiandistributionN(·|µ=
f(x),σ =0.1) according to:

N(2.5), if x<−0.3

p(y|x)= ρ N(4x)+ρ N(−4x), if −0.3≤x<0.3
1 2
ρ N(5+log(x+1))+ρ N(−x+0.2)+ρ N(5x2), if x≥0.3
3 4 5
where ρ = 0.2, ρ = 0.8, ρ = 0.3, ρ = 0.5 and ρ = 0.2. This generates the
1 2 3 4 5
multimodalfunctionshowninFigure5a.Westudythistoyproblemtovisualize
how different architectures will fit this simple data structure with conditional
unimodal (left), bimodal (middle) and trimodal (right) structure (see Figure 5a
left,middleandrightparts).Figure5b-fshowthesamplesgeneratedbydifferent
models after training on 30,000 mini-batch steps (See Appendix C for details).
Table 1 displays the variational lower bound (VLB) and negative log-likelihood
(NLL) on a test set.
Afeed-forwardnetworktrainedonmeansquarederrordeterministicallypre-
dicts the conditional expectation (Figure 5b). For fair comparison, we also train
a feed-forward network that does receive noise variables (cid:15) as input but with-
outan inferencenetwork (Figure5c).Theoreticallythisnetworkcouldlearn the
same decoder distribution, but without the inference network the model does
not converge.
Figure 5d-f show the samples generated by different variational methods
(spherical Gaussian Sec. 3.1), Gaussian with flow (Sec. 3.3), and discrete latent
variables(Sec.3.2),respectively.Weseehowthesemodelsaremuchbetteratfit-
tingthetruedatadistribution.Importantly,noticethatthevariationalapproach
consistently predicts the deterministic part correctly (left part of the function).
Thisisimportant,asthenetworkisabletoignoretheinputnoisewhenneeded.
Table 1 indicates the discrete latent variable model fits this problem best.
4.2 Stochastic Gridworld
WenowstudyatypicalRLgridworldtaskwithmultimodalstochasticdynamics.
Theworldisa7x7grid(seeFigure6)withsomewalls.Theagent(green)startsin
Fig.5. Comparison of samples from the models produced by multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) and variational inference (VI) networks after training for 30,000 mini-batches.
a) Ground truth data. b) MLP (deterministic predictions). c) MLP with stochastic
inputs. d) VI with spherical Gaussian. e) VI with spherical Gaussian and 5 layers of
flow. f) VI with discrete latent variables. Numerical results are reported in Table 1.
Table 1. Performance on toy domain. All results are averaged over 10 runs. VLB =
Variational Lower Bound, NLL = Negative Log Likelihood on test dataset, MLP =
Multi-Layer Perceptron, VAE = Variational Auto-Encoder.
Method VLB NLL
MLP (deterministic) NA NA
MLP (with stochastic input) NA 4.49
VAE continuous (n=3, no flow) 0.33 -0.29
VAE continuous (n=3, n =5) 0.32 -0.33
flow
VAE discrete (n=3, k=3) 0.47 -0.48
thebottom-left,candeterministicallymoveineachcardinaldirection,andneeds
to reach the top-right (r =+10). There are two ghosts, starting in locations as
shown in Fig. 7, top-left. Ghost 1 (red) uniformly chooses one of the available
directions. Ghost 2 (blue) has a bias to move to the left or right (40% each),
and moves vertically with small probability (10%). Our interest here is to learn
to predict this stochasticity from observed data. As state-space we use a vector
of length 6 containing the 2D coordinates for the agent and both ghosts. Each
element in the vector is treated as a categorical variable with 7 classes (for the
7x7 grid).4
Uncorrelated Data. On of the core challenges of RL is the exploration prob-
lem, which can make the data we observe strongly correlated. For example, if
4 Note that, although this is a discrete MDP, it is not a trivial task to model multi-
modality here. Indeed, the outcome distribution per state dimension is categorical,
butthejointdistribution(generally)doesnotfactorizeoverthedimensions.There-
fore, we would already need a categorical with 76 = 117649 outcome categories to
learn this problem without conditional variational inference, and this would expo-
nentially aggravate in larger state-spaces (e.g. images).
Fig.6. Visual predictions on gridworld. Each sub-picture shows the agent (green),
ghost 1 (red) and ghost 2 (blue) with current location as a circle, and predicted next
location as a shaded box (color intensity corresponds to predicted probability). Black
locationsarewalls,thetextaboveeachsubplotindicatestheactionchosenbytheagent.
Left: Continuous latent variables (n=8, no flow), Middle: continuous latent variable
(n=8, n =6), Right: discrete latent variables (n=8,k=4). We observe stochastic
flow
predictionsfortheghostsanddeterministicpredictionsfortheagent.Numericalcom-
parison is provided in Table 2.
Table 2.Performanceongridworldpredictionsfordifferenttypesofvariationalinfer-
ence. For this table, pˆdenotes the predicted distributions by the VAE model, while p
denotesthegroundtruth(whichisknownforthisscenario).VLB=VariationalLower
Bound, NLL = Negative Log Likelihood.
Method VLB NLL D (p(cid:107)pˆ) D (p(cid:107)pˆ) D (pˆ(cid:107)p)
KL Hel KL
VAE Continuous (n=8, no flow) -2.53 2.52 0.91 0.48 3.12
VAE Continuous (n=8, n =6) -2.66 2.70 2.74 0.60 4.29
flow
VAE Discrete (n=8, k=4) -2.17 2.20 1.26 0.61 4.75
the agent never explores the top-left region of the domain, we can not expect it
to learn an accurate model there. To overcome this problem, we first study an
idealized setting in which our dataset consists of the transitions of state-action
combinations randomly sampled across state-space.
On-policy Agent. TheresultsonthistaskareshowninTable2.Comparedto
Table 1 we do not show MLP results anymore for this task. We see the discrete
latent variables again perform best on negative log-likelihood (NLL) evaluation.
However, when we compare the learned distribution to the true distribution
(which is available for this problem), we see the continuous latent variables
withoutflowactuallyperformbest.Weseeaconflictbetweenbothperformance
measures (the NLL indicates the discrete model performs best, while the dis-
tances with the true distribution point at the continuous latent model). In this
case, visual comparison (Figure 6) does not show important differences across
methods. We therefore conclude that the differences between methods are small
Fig.7.On-policypredictionsforRLagent(seeFig.6forcolorexplanation).Thesub-
plotsprogressrow-wisealongaroll-outinthelearnedtransitionmodel.Notethatthis
is a true 12-step roll-out, i.e. each next plot is based on sampling a single prediction
from the model (we do not observe any true next state along the way).
for this problem, while the best performance measures for generative models
remains an open questions in general (see [13]).
As a next step, we investigate to what extend an RL agent is capable of
learning an accurate transition model on-policy, i.e. while observing correlated
data.Notethattheagentisstilllearningitspolicyinamodel-freesensehere(as
a deep Q-network [24]), and we simply investigate to what extend the learned
transition model is accurate after observing correlated data. Therefore, we eval-
uate the learned transition model while the agent is executing the policy.
Figure 7 shows the results of a roll-out in the learned model under a model-
free policy. We see the agent first walking along the bottom corridor, and then
moving up in the vertical corridor. Note that the agent consistently predicts its
next state deterministically and correctly. In frame 6 it makes a wrong action
decision,probablybecauseweexecutethebehaviouralpolicywithsmall(cid:15)-greedy
noise. The ghosts have multimodal, stochastic behaviour. The first ghost (red)
moves uniformly in one of the available directions, which is captured by the
red shades around the current ghost location. Note that the model consistently
predicts the ghost to move at each step. The second ghost (blue) has a bias to
primarily step to the left or right. We also note the difference in the predicted
nextstatebetweenredandblueghost,matchingtheirtruedynamics.Altogether,
the agent has learned to predict both the deterministic effects of its own actions
as well as its stochastic environment, from on-policy, correlated data.
5 Related Work
Variational inference in the conditional setting was previously studied by Sohn
et al. [28] and Walker et al. [32]. Compared to our work, these papers only
use spherical Gaussian priors, and do not focus on reinforcement learning tasks.
Our work focussed on VI with reparametrization gradients. There is a second
line of research on latent variable models that uses score function gradients
[23], which are also known as REINFORCE in the RL context. A benefit of
reparametrization gradients is that they don’t suffer from the high variance
usually encountered with score function gradients (a problem also known in
RL).
The idea to apply flow to the latent layer originates from Rezende and Mo-
hamed[27].ThetransformationinEq.9arerelatedtotheaffine coupling layers
of Dinh et al. [9], but then applied to the latent layer of a CVAE, while Dnih
et al. [9] use them directly from observation level without variational inference.
Applying flow transformations at latent VI level was introduced by Kingma et
al. [18], where the authors used fully autoregressive transformations (which are
hardertoimplementcomparedtoourtransformations,butpotentiallyhavemore
representational capacity).
To increase the expressivity of the latent approximation, we focussed on
different types of latent variables, as well as (normalizing) flow. A third way to
increase latent capacity is to factorize the distribution into several layers [29].
However,activatingdeeperstochasticlayersisnotstraightforward[29],requiring
either batch normalization or weight normalization [18]. We defer factorized
inference networks to future work, especially in higher-dimensional tasks.
The different deep generative models discussed in Section 3 are not mu-
tually exclusive. For example, the variational lossy auto-encoder (LVAE) [5]
combines variational inference with PixelCNN-based decoders [26]. Such archi-
tectures force high-level conceptual information into the latent level, while the
decoder should capture fine-grained details. This could be beneficial to sparsify
the latent layer and as such benefit RL planning as well.
ThereisrelativelylittleworkonBayesianNeuralNetworksforRL.Closestto
oursistheworkbyDepewegetal.[8],whostudyVItoestimatebothtransition
function stochasticity (as studied in this work) combined with uncertainty (due
tolimiteddata).Comparedtotheirwork,weuseaparametricinferencenetwork
which allows us to generalize in the inference part, while they perform VI per
individual datapoint. Second, they only considered Gaussian latent variables,
while we investigate discrete latent variables and normalizing flow as well. The
results of Depeweg et al. [8] also show the ability to learn multimodal stochas-
ticity, and additionally show the benefit of planning over the model. Watter et
al. [33] also used variational auto-encoders in a control task, but only as a reg-
ularizer for learning representations, not to make stochastic predictions. Gal et
al.[11]usesBayesianneuralnetworks,intheformofBayesiandropout,totrack
uncertainty (due to limited data) in transition dynamics estimation.
Finally, there is also a line of RL research that uses the transition function
target to speed-up model-free RL. This idea has been identified as RL with
‘auxiliary tasks’ [16]. The gradients of the transition function predictions are
densercomparedtothesparseRLtrainingsignal,andusedtospeed-uptraining
ofdeepernetworklayerssharedbetweenpolicyandtransitionnetwork.However,
thisapproachdoesnotlearnstochastictransitions(butcouldbenefitfromit,as
it improves the learning signal), nor is it used for sample-based planning as in
model-based RL.
6 Future Work
One clear line of future work is to use these transition models to improve agent
performance, by planning over the model with either a given or learned reward
function.Depewegetal.[8]alreadyprovidedastudyinthisdirection.Compared
totheirwork,itwouldespeciallybeinterestingtoapplymoreadaptiveroll-outs
in the model, like Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Moreover, it would be
important to evaluate these methods in high-dimensional RL tasks, e.g. with
convolutional neural networks on raw pixel data [25]. Another extension is to
use these models to improve exploration in stochastic domains (e.g. [25,15]).
An important second challenge, briefly mentioned in the Introduction and
Section 4.2, is planning under uncertainty. RL initially provides correlated data
fromalimitedpartofstate-space.Whenplanningoverthismodel,weshouldnot
extrapolatetoomuch,nortrustourmodeltooearlywithlimiteddata.Planning
under uncertainty was for example studied by Gal et al. [11] and Houthooft et
al. [15]. Note that ‘uncertainty’ (due to limited data) is fundamentally different
from the ‘stochasticity’ (true probabilistic nature of the domain) discussed in
this paper.
A third challenge for transition dynamics estimation is memory (partial ob-
servability),whenthecurrentstatedoesnotprovideallavailableinformationto
makeanprediction.Proposedsolutionsarerecurrentneuralnetworks(RNN)or
NeuralTuringMachines(NTM),whichhavebothbeenstudiedinthevariational
inference context (in [6] and [12], respectively).
Combining stochasticity, uncertainty and memory in one function approxi-
mator would be an important integrating step in model-based RL.
7 Conclusion
This paper studied multimodal transition function estimation for RL agents,
with a focus on variational inference with different types of latent variables.
Our experiments show variational inference is a robust method to discriminate
deterministic and stochastic elements of the transition function using function
approximation,clearlyimprovingoverdiscriminativetraining.Weverifiedresults
onatypicalRLdomainwheretabularlearningwouldbeinfeasible,showingthe
ability of these models to learn the multimodal transition dynamics online. We
didnotobserveimportantdistinctioninperformancebetweenthedifferenttypes
oflatentvariablesstudied.Therefore,forthedomainsizestudiedinthiswork,it
seems safe to use the standard spherical Gaussian conditional VAE. Our results
are generally applicable in RL, and help solve a fundamental problem of many
domains: the complex stochastic behaviour of its transition dynamics. Code to
reproduce the results in this paper is publicly available at www.github.com/
tmoer/multimodal_varinf.
References
1. Atkeson,C.G.,Moore,A.W.,Schaal,S.:Locallyweightedlearningforcontrol.In:
Lazy learning, pp. 75–113. Springer (1997)
2. Bellemare, M., Srinivasan, S., Ostrovski, G., Schaul, T., Saxton, D., Munos, R.:
Unifyingcount-basedexplorationandintrinsicmotivation.In:AdvancesinNeural
Information Processing Systems. pp. 1471–1479 (2016)
3. Brafman, R.I., Tennenholtz, M.: R-max-a general polynomial time algorithm
for near-optimal reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research
3(Oct), 213–231 (2002)
4. Burda, Y., Grosse, R., Salakhutdinov, R.: Importance weighted autoencoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.00519 (2015)
5. Chen, X., Kingma, D.P., Salimans, T., Duan, Y., Dhariwal, P., Schulman,
J., Sutskever, I., Abbeel, P.: Variational Lossy Autoencoder. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02731 (2016)
6. Chung, J., Kastner, K., Dinh, L., Goel, K., Courville, A.C., Bengio, Y.: A recur-
rent latent variable model for sequential data. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems. pp. 2980–2988 (2015)
7. Deisenroth, M., Rasmussen, C.E.: PILCO: A model-based and data-efficient ap-
proach to policy search. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
machine learning (ICML-11). pp. 465–472 (2011)
8. Depeweg, S., Herna´ndez-Lobato, J.M., Doshi-Velez, F., Udluft, S.: Learning and
policysearchinstochasticdynamicalsystemswithbayesianneuralnetworks.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.07127 (2016)
9. Dinh,L.,Sohl-Dickstein,J.,Bengio,S.:DensityestimationusingRealNVP.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.08803 (2016)
10. Finn, C., Levine, S.: Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In: IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2017)
11. Gal,Y.,McAllister,R.T.,Rasmussen,C.E.:ImprovingPILCOwithBayesianNeu-
ralNetworkDynamicsModels.In:Data-EfficientMachineLearningworkshop.vol.
951, p. 2016 (2016)
12. Gemici, M., Hung, C.C., Santoro, A., Wayne, G., Mohamed, S., Rezende, D.J.,
Amos,D.,Lillicrap,T.:GenerativeTemporalModelswithMemory.arXivpreprint
arXiv:1702.04649 (2017)
13. Goodfellow, I.: NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.00160 (2016)
14. Hester,T.,Stone,P.:Learningandusingmodels.In:ReinforcementLearning,pp.
111–141. Springer (2012)
15. Houthooft,R.,Chen,X.,Duan,Y.,Schulman,J.,DeTurck,F.,Abbeel,P.:VIME:
Variational information maximizing exploration. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. pp. 1109–1117 (2016)
16. Jaderberg, M., Mnih, V., Czarnecki, W.M., Schaul, T., Leibo, J.Z., Silver, D.,
Kavukcuoglu,K.:Reinforcementlearningwithunsupervisedauxiliarytasks.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.05397 (2016)
17. Jang,E.,Gu,S.,Poole,B.:CategoricalReparameterizationwithGumbel-Softmax.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144 (2016)
18. Kingma, D.P., Salimans, T., Jozefowicz, R., Chen, X., Sutskever, I., Welling, M.:
ImprovedVariationalInferencewithInverseAutoregressiveFlow.In:Advancesin
Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 4743–4751 (2016)
19. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114 (2013)
20. Li,L.,Littman,M.L.,Walsh,T.J.,Strehl,A.L.:Knowswhatitknows:aframework
for self-aware learning. Machine learning 82(3), 399–443 (2011)
21. Li,Y.,Turner,R.E.:R´enyidivergencevariationalinference.In:AdvancesinNeural
Information Processing Systems. pp. 1073–1081 (2016)
22. Maddison, C.J., Mnih, A., Teh, Y.W.: The Concrete Distribution: A Continuous
RelaxationofDiscreteRandomVariables.arXivpreprintarXiv:1611.00712(2016)
23. Mnih,A.,Gregor,K.:Neuralvariationalinferenceandlearninginbeliefnetworks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.0030 (2014)
24. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G.,
Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., et al.: Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518(7540), 529–533 (2015)
25. Oh,J.,Guo,X.,Lee,H.,Lewis,R.L.,Singh,S.:Action-conditionalvideoprediction
usingdeepnetworksinatarigames.In:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessing
Systems. pp. 2863–2871 (2015)
26. Oord, A.v.d., Kalchbrenner, N., Vinyals, O., Espeholt, L., Graves, A.,
Kavukcuoglu, K.: Conditional image generation with PixelCNN decoders. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.05328 (2016)
27. Rezende, D.J., Mohamed, S.: Variational inference with normalizing flows. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1505.05770 (2015)
28. Sohn, K., Lee, H., Yan, X.: Learning structured output representation using deep
conditionalgenerativemodels.In:AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSys-
tems. pp. 3483–3491 (2015)
29. Sønderby,C.K.,Raiko,T.,Maaløe,L.,Sønderby,S.K.,Winther,O.:Laddervaria-
tional autoencoders. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp.
3738–3746 (2016)
30. Stadie, B.C., Levine, S., Abbeel, P.: Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814 (2015)
31. Sutton,R.S.:Dyna,anintegratedarchitectureforlearning,planning,andreacting.
ACM SIGART Bulletin 2(4), 160–163 (1991)
32. Walker,J.,Doersch,C.,Gupta,A.,Hebert,M.:AnUncertainFuture:Forecasting
from Static Images Using Variational Autoencoders. In: European Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 835–851. Springer (2016)
33. Watter, M., Springenberg, J., Boedecker, J., Riedmiller, M.: Embed to control: A
locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 2746–2754 (2015)
A Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) Training Objective
We can obtain a tighter bound on Equation 2 by using importance sampling
[4]. We sample M values of z per datapoint, and average over them inside the
log. Otherwise, the model strongly penalizes for single samples that explain the
objective poorly. Second, instead of the KL divergence we optimize Renyi α-
divergences [21]). We use α=0.5 according to the results by Depeweg et al. [8],
which makes the divergence term become a function of the Hellinger distance
[21]. The combined objective, known as the variational Renyi (VR) bound [21]
is:
1 1 (cid:88) M (cid:20)(cid:18) p(y,zm|x) (cid:19)1−α(cid:21)
L (y|x)= log (13)
VR 1−α M q(zm|y,x)
m=1
with zm ∼q(·|x,y).
B Test Set Negative Log-likelihood (NLL) for VAE
We are interested in the likelihood p(y|x) of a set of test data {x ,y }N . We
i i i=1
therefore need to marginalize over z:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
p(y|x)=E p(y|z,x) (14)
z∼p(·|x)
Oneproblemwiththisestimatoristhatwemayneedmanyempiricalsamples
from z to get an accurate estimate. As an alternative, we estimate the quantity
through importance sampling, by sampling from q(·|x ,y ) instead of p(·|x ):
i i i
(cid:20) (cid:21)
p(z|x)
p(y|x)=E p(y|z,x) (15)
z∼q(·|x,y) q(z|x,y)
The empirical estimate of the negative log likelihood (NLL), as reported in
the results section, then becomes
−logp(y|x)=− 1 (cid:88) N log (cid:104) 1 (cid:88) M p(y |zm,x ) p(z i m|x i ) (cid:105) (16)
N M i i i q(zm|x ,y )
i=1 m=1 i i i
with zm ∼q(·|x ,y ).
i i i
C Training Details
For all experiments we follow standard train, validation and test set set-up. For
all domains, we train the VAE target on k =3 importance samples with Renyi-
α divergence for α = 0.5 (see appendix A). This gave us slightly better results
compared to the ‘default’ settings of k =1 and α=1.0. All models are trained
in Tensorflow using Adam optimizer.
Toy Domain: We draw a training set of size 2000, and independent valida-
tion and test sets of size 500 and 2000, respectively. The decoder distribution is
Gaussian,wherewealsolearnitsstandarddeviation.Wetrainfor30000batches
with batch size 64, with a learning rate linearly annealed from 0.005 to 0.0005
over 90% of training steps. The minimal KL penalty per dimension λ (Eq. 12)
is fixed at 0.07.
The generative network has three layers with 50 units per layer and Relu
non-linearities.Theinferencenetworkhastwolayerswith30unitsperlayerand
Relunon-linearities.Forthediscretelatentvariables,weannealthetemperature
from 2.0 to 0.001 over 70% of training steps.
Gridworld:Forthefirsttask,werepeatedlydrawtrainingdatabysampling
anewstate-actioncombinationuniformlyacrossstate-space,andsamplingasin-
gle transition. Optimal model performance is based on a VAE performance on a
validation and test set of size 750 and 1500 respectively. The decoder distribu-
tion is discrete takingvalues in 7categories.We train on mini-batches of size 32
for75000iterations,withalearningratelinearlyannealedfrom0.0005to0.0001
over 70% of training steps. The generative network has three layers with 250
units per layer and Relu non-linearities. The inference network has two layers
with 100 units per layer and Relu non-linearities. The minimal KL penalty per
dimension λ (Eq. 12) is fixed at 0.07.
Fortheon-policyevaluation,theRLpolicyistrainedasadeepQ-network[24]
with target network and no experience replay. The state-action value network
has three layers of 50 units and Relu activations. Given a mini-batch M of roll-
outdataunderthecurrentpolicy,thenetworkistrainedonthe1stepQ-learning
objective:
(cid:20)(cid:18) (cid:19)2(cid:21)
L (η)=E r+γmaxQ(s(cid:48),a(cid:48);η−)−Q(s,a;η) (17)
RL (s,a,r,s(cid:48))∼M
a(cid:48)
where s,a,r denote state, action and reward, Q(s,a) is the expected dis-
counted return (discount parameter γ = 0.99) from state s and action a under
the current policy, η are the parameters in the value function network, and η−
theparametersinthetargetnetwork(whicharefixedintheaboveloss,andonly
updated every 500 steps). During learning, we follow an (cid:15)-greedy policy with (cid:15)
linearly decayed from 1.0 to 0.10 over 60% of training steps.
