5102
voN
3
]LP.sc[
1v61900.1151:viXra
Lowering the learning curve for declarative
programming: a Python API for the IDP system
Joost Vennekens
Dept.Computer Science, KU Leuven
Technology Campus DeNayer,Sint-Katelijne-Waver,Belgium
Abstract. Programmers may be hesitant to use declarative systems,
because of the associated learning curve. In this paper, we present an
API that integrates the IDP Knowledge Base system into the Python
programming language. IDP is a state-of-the-art logical system, which
usesSAT,SMT,LogicProgrammingandAnswerSetProgrammingtech-
nology. Python is currently one of the most widely used (teaching) lan-
guages for programming. The first goal of ourAPI is to allow a Python
programmer to use the declarative power of IDP, without needing to
learn any new syntax or semantics. The second goal is allow IDP to be
added to/removed from an existing code base with minimal changes.
1 Introduction
While declarative systems may not be inherently more difficult to learn than,
e.g., an object-oriented programming language, they are still often perceived as
such,becausemanyprogrammersareunfamiliarwiththeirsyntax,semanticsor
paradigm.This leads in turnto a chicken-and-eggproblem,where programmers
donotlearnthistechnology,becausecompaniesarereluctanttoadoptit,because
there are not enough programmerswho know the technology readily available.
In this paper, we propose to tackle both problems by means of an API that
allows a declarative knowledge base (KB) to be used from within a well-known
imperativehostlanguage.OurfirstgoalistointegrateKBfunctionalityintothe
host languageas seamlessly as possible. In this way,it shouldbe possible to use
the knowledge base to prototype a single component of a large system, without
affectingtherestofthecodebase.Thesecondgoalistohaveaverylowlearning
curvefortheAPI.Weachievethisbyusingasmuchaspossiblethesyntaxofthe
host language, and by requiring no more background in declarative languages
than an introductory course on classical logic. We therefore expect our API to
be immediately usable by, e.g., bachelor students in a typical CS curriculum.
Inmoredetail,wepostulatetheseguidelinesforourdevelopmentoftheAPI:
– The interaction between the KB and host language should be done through
standard objects of the host language.
– The need to learn KB-specific terminology should be kept to a minimum.
– ItshouldbeaseasyaspossibletoreplacetheKBbyapieceofhostlanguage
code (or, vice versa, to replace a piece of host language code by a KB).
Atypicaluse forourAPIwillbe tooff-loadspecific computationalproblems
(e.g., detect connected components in a graph, find a permissible allocation of
resources to jobs) to the KB, thereby avoiding the need to implement a specific
algorithm and thus arriving at a working prototype more quickly. In such an
early prototype, the modular, declarative nature of the KB will be particularly
useful, because of its ability to easily cope with additional changes to the spec-
ification. Once the program has reached a certain level of maturity, it can of
course be profiled to see whether all of the KB components meet the perfor-
mance requirements. Whenever this is not the case, the KB can be replaced by
a dedicated algorithm with minimal impact on the rest of the code.
As a host language, we use Python (in particular, version 2.7). Given our
stated goals, this is the most obvious choice: “[a]t the time of writing (July
2014),Python is currently the most popular language for teaching introductory
computer science courses at top-ranked U.S. departments.”1 We assume famil-
iarity with the basics of Pythonthroughoutthis paper.The KB systemthat we
usewillbe discussedinSection2.Section3thendiscussesourinterfacebetween
hostlanguageandKB,whichwevalidatebymeansofsomeexamplesinSection
4. In Section 5, we give some brief notes on the implementation of our API.
Finally, Section 6 discusses some related work, in particular, other approaches
that integrate a declarative knowledge base into an imperative language.
2 KB system
As anunderlying KB system,we will use IDP (Imperative Declarative Program-
ming)2 [2], which combines techniques from SAT solving, Logic Programming
and Answer Set Programming (ASP). It has performed well in previous ASP
competitions, e.g., narrowlyfinishing second after Clasp in the System Track of
3
2011 . IDP has a number of properties that fit well with our goals of achieving
both a tight integration with the host language and a low learning curve.
Inputlanguage.IDPusesalanguagethatisaconservativeextensionofclassi-
calfirst-orderlogic(FO).Becausemoststudentsofcomputersciencearefamiliar
with FO, this means that the learning curve for a large partof IDP’s input lan-
guage consists only of learning a particular ASCII syntax for FO. One of the
ways in which IDP extends FO is by adding inductive definitions [3]. Because
such definitions cannot, in general, be expressed in FO, this is a real extension
of the language. Moreover, since inductive datatypes (lists, trees, ...) are very
common in computer programs, this feature will prove useful in our API.
Inference. In additionto its input language,a seconduseful propertyof IDP
isthatitaimstosupportavarietyofdifferentinferencetasks.Particularlyuseful
in the context of this article is the task of finite model expansion. As pointed
out in [6], modal expansion for FO captures the complexity class NP, thereby
1 http://cacm.acm.org/blogs/blog-cacm/176450-python-is-now-the-most-
popular-introductory-teaching-language-at-top-us-universities/fulltext
2 https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/software/idp
3 https://www.mat.unical.it/aspcomp2011/
84
covering the kind of tasks that we would like to off-load to a declarative KB.
Moreover, [7] have further demonstrated that model expansion is a key task
when using declarative methods to build modular software systems.
2.1 FO: syntax and semantics
We briefly recall the standard syntax and semantics of FO. A vocabulary Σ
consists of a set of function symbols, each with an associated arity n, and a
set of predicate symbols, also each with an arity n. A function with arity 0
is called a constant. A term is either a constant, a variable or an expression
f(t1,...,tn)where f is ann-aryfunction symbolandthe ti areterms.An atom
isanexpressionP(t1,...,tn),withP ann-arypredicateandthe ti againterms.
A formula is either anatom or an expressionψ∨φ, ψ∧φ, ¬φ, ∀x:φ, or ∃x:φ,
whereψ,φareformulasandxisa variable.As usual,φ⇒ψ abbreviates¬φ∨ψ
and φ⇔ψ stands for (φ⇒ψ)∧(ψ ⇒φ). A sentence is a formula without free
variables and a theory is a finite set of sentences.
The standard semantics of FO is defined in terms of structures for a vocab-
ulary Σ. Each structure S consists of a domain D and a mapping of:
– Each n-ary predicate symbol P in Σ to an n-ary relation R⊆Dn
– Each n-ary function symbol f in Σ to an n-ary function f :Dn →D
The satisfaction relation |= is defined between structures for a vocabulary and
theories of this vocabulary(or a subvocabularythereof) by the usual induction.
When S |=T, we also say that the structure S is a model of T.
2.2 FO in the IDP system
IDPusesthestandardconceptsofvocabular-
ies,theoriesandstructures.Eachofthesehas
aspecificsyntacticrepresentation.Forexam- FOIDP Python
ple,amapcoloringproblemcanbedescribed ∧ & and
in the following vocabulary V. ∨ | or
¬ ~ not
vocabulary V {
⇒ => not present
type Color
= = ==
type Area
6= ~= !=
Border(Area,Area)
∀ ! all
Coloring(Area): Color
∃ ? any
}
Fig.1. ASCIIsyntax of IDP.
As can be seen here, IDP in fact uses a
typed variant of first-order logic. The first
twostatementsdefinetwotypes(whichcanbeseenasunarypredicates),whereas
the last two statements define, respectively, a predicate and a function.
ThefollowingtheoryT invocabularyV consistsofasinglesentence,express-
ing that neighboring areas must have a different color. Fig. 1 shows the ASCII
symbols that are used in IDP to represent the logical connectives.
85
theory T : V {
!a b: Border(a,b) => Coloring(a) ~= Coloring(b).
}
IDP is usually able to automatically derive the types of variables, based on
the type declarations in the definition of the vocabulary. This information is
important because most of its inference tasks require IDP to first ground (part
of) the theory. Instead of depending on IDP’s automatic type derivation, it is
also possible to explicitly declare the type of a variable, e.g.:
!a [Area] b [Area]: Border(a,b) => Coloring(a) ~= Coloring(b).
AstructureS foravocabularyV isrepresentedbyanenumeration(1)ofthe
values that belong to each type, (2) of the tuples that belong to each predicate,
and (3) of the mapping of tuples to values that is made by each function.
structure S : V {
Area = { Belgium; Holland; Germany; }
Color = { Blue; Red; Green; }
Border = {(Belgium,Holland); (Belgium,Germany); (Holland,Germany)}
}
This structure S for the vocabularyV interprets only partof the vocabularyV.
Inparticular,thefunctionColoringisnotinterpreted.Oneoftheinferencetasks
supported by the IDP system is that of model expansion: given a structure S′
for a subvocabularyΣ′ of the vocabulary Σ of a theory T, compute a structure
S for the remaining symbols Σ\Σ′ such that (S′ ∪S)|=T.
IDP exposes its functionality by means of an API in the Lua scripting lan-
guage. The command printmodels(modelexpand(T,S)) performs the model
expansion task for the above structure S and theory T, resulting in the output:
Coloring = {"Belgium"->"Red";"Germany"->"Blue";"Holland"->"Green"}
By default, a single model expansion is computed, but it is also possible to
compute several or all of them. A special case of model expansion occurs when
the initial structure S already interprets the entire vocabulary V of the theory
T. In this case, it reduces to checking whether S |=T.
3 Interfacing with the KB System
ThissectionpresentsourAPIforusingtheIDPKBsystemfromwithinPython.
3.1 Vocabularies and structures
All interaction with the IDP system is done through objects of the IDP class.
Each such object represents a knowledge base consisting of a triple (V,S,T) of
a vocabulary V, a structure S and a theory T. It can be created as follows:
86
kb = IDP()
The following methods add symbols to the vocabulary of the KB:
kb.Type(name [ , interpretation ])
kb.Constant(typed name [ , interpretation]
kb.Function(typed name [ , interpretation ])
kb.Predicate(typed name [ , interpretation ])
As in IDP itself, the typed_name of a predicate is a string of the form
Foo(Type1, ..., Type2)andthatofafunctionisFoo(Type1, ..., Type2):
Return_type.Becauseconstantsareidenticalto0-aryfunctions,theirtyped_name
hastheformFoo : Type.OnceasymbolFoohasbeenaddedtothevocabulary
of a knowledge base kb, it can thereafter be referred to as kb.Foo.
In additionto declaringa function/predicate symbol σ (i.e., adding it to the
vocabularyofthe KB),it is alsopossible to immediately extend the structureS
with a particular interpretation σS for σ. This is done by adding this interpre-
tationasasecondargument.Theinterpretationofa type mustbe aset(orlist)
ofvalues;thatofaconstantmustbe asinglevalue;thatofa functionwitharity
≥ 1 must be mapping (e.g., a dictionary); and that of a predicate must be a
set/list of tuples of the correct arity (for predicates with arity 1, a set of simple
values is also allowed). Obviously,the typing of the symbols must be respected.
Instead of initialising the interpretation of a symbol upon construction, it is
alsopossibletofirstdeclareasymbolandthenlaterusetheassignmentoperator
toprovideaninterpretationforit.Weillustrateusing(partof)thegraphcoloring
example of Sec. 2.2.
color = IDP()
color .Type("Color", ["Blue", "Red", "Green"])
color .Type("Area", ["Belgium","Holland", "Germany"])
color . Predicate("Border(Area,Area)")
color .Border=[("Belgium","Holland") ,("Belgium","Germany") ,
("Holland","Germany")]
color .Function("Coloring(Area): Color")
The “logical” objects that are thus created implement a number of common
Python interfaces, allowing them to act as Python programmers would expect.
A relation is, in mathematical terms, a set of tuples. Its natural counterpart
is a Python MutableSet object4 (i.e., a set which allows adding/removing of
elements).Thefollowinginteractivesessiondemonstratessomestandardusages.
>>> "Belgium" in color .Area
True
>>> color .Area.add("Austria")
>>> for x in color .Area:
4 https://docs.python.org/2/library/collections.html#collections.Set
87
... print x,
...
Holland Austria Germany Belgium
InadditiontothestandardMutableSet functionality,relationsarealsocallable5,
so that we may also use the standard FO notation for checking membership.
>>> color .Area("Belgium")
True
A function is a Mapping6, that is, an object that maps each tuple of values
in its domain to a value in its range. Some standard usages are:
>>> color .Coloring.keys()
[’Austria’, ’Germany’, ’Holland’, ’Belgium’]
>>> color .Coloring["Belgium"]
’Blue’
As with predicates, function objects are callable to allow for the more FO-like:
>>> color .Coloring("Belgium")
’Blue’
3.2 Formulas and definitions
In keeping with our goalof achieving a low learning curve, formulas are written
inPythonsyntax.AnoverviewisshowninFig.1.The Pythonlanguagehasthe
standard boolean operators and, or and not. In addition, it also has the func-
tions allandany,whichmay be appliedto lists ofbooleanvaluesto returnthe
conjunction/disjunction of these values. The latter two functions, together with
Python’s list comprehension syntax, can be used as universal/existential quan-
tification.Thelistcomprehensionsyntaxalsohasanoptionalifpart,whichmay
beusedtorepresentthecommonpatternofauniversallyquantifiedimplication:
∀x[Type]:φ all(φ for x in Type)
∃x[Type]:φ any(φ for x in Type)
∀x[Type]:φ⇒ψ all(ψ for x in Type if φ)
In the graph coloring problem, we need to express the following property:
∀a b:Border(a,b)⇒Coloring(a)6=Coloring(b) (1)
Section 2.2 already presented the IDP syntax for this. In Python, we can write
the same property as:
5 https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#callable
6 https://docs.python.org/2/library/collections.html#collections.Mapping
88
all(color .Coloring(a) != color .Coloring(b)
for (a,b) in color .Border)
Note that this is just a normal Python expression, which we can, e.g., just type
into the interactive terminal. This expression evaluates to True precisely when
property (1) is satisfied. We can make the KB aware of such a constraint by
means of its Constraintmethod, which takes a string as its argument. So, the
following code adds the above constraint to our graph coloring KB:
color .Constraint("all(Coloring(a) != Coloring(b)
for (a,b) in Border")
ThestringargumentiscompletelyidenticaltothePythonexpressionwesaw
above,withoneexception:the predicates/functionsaresimplycalledColoring,
Area and Border,instead of color.Coloring,color.Areaand color.Border.
This is because, just as a theory can only contain symbols that appear in its
vocabulary, the constraints that are added to a KB always refer to the symbols
of that KB.
An alternative formula,which is equivalent to the one above,quantifies over
Area×Area and uses an if-expressionto check for membership in Border:
color .Constraint("all(Coloring(a) != Coloring(b)
for a in Area for b in Area if (a,b) in Border)")
3.3 Functional interfacing
InkeepingwithourgoalofmakingtheAPIeasytouse,theprogrammerdoesnot
needtoexplicitlyinvoketheIDPsystem.Thisavoidstheneedtolearnnewfunc-
tionsornewterminology,andreducesthepossibilityofbugs.Instead,invokation
of the IDP system happens “automagically” in the following circumstances:
– Symbols that have been declared, but for which no interpretation has been
provided, are automatically assigned a valid interpretation (in accordance
with FO semantics) when their content is inspected. In other words, IDP is
used as an oracle to lazily fill in the interpretation of any declared symbols
for which the user does not provide one herself. This is done in a way that
the interpretations of all symbols together constitutes an FO model of the
constraints, i.e., a model expansion task is performed. If the constraints
admit multiple models, one is chosen arbitrarily.
– The KB object has an attribute satisfiable, which is automatically set
to True/False(depending on whether the KB is satisfiable) when the user
converts it to a boolean (either explicitly with bool(.) or by use in an
if-statement).
In the previous section, we declared a function color.Coloring without
adding an interpretation for this function. Therefore, the IDP system will be
invoked to compute a coloring of our graph if we execute the following code:
89
for x in color .Area:
print "Area %s has color %s" % (x, color .Coloring[x])
Note that if we had added an interpretation for the function Coloring before
executing this code, then this for-loop would still continue work as expected.
This is an important property, because it allows us to change whether a re-
lation/function is computed by the KB base or by native Python code, with-
out having to adjust the code that makes use of it. In the latter case, the call
color.Coloring[x] will just retrieve the pre-computed coloring stored within
the color object, without invoking IDP.
Similarly, if a coloring is not provided, then the following code will test
whether a given graph can be colored, whereas if it is provided, the same code
checks whether it is indeed valid.
if color . satisfiable :
print "The graph can be colored"
3.4 Inductive definitions
An important feature of the IDP system is its ability to handle inductive defi-
nitions. It uses a rule-based syntax for representing such definitions, in which,
e.g., the transitive closure TC of a graph G can be defined as follows
∀x,y :TC(x,y)←G(x,y).
(∀x,y :TC(x,y)←∃z : G(x,z)∧TC(z,y). )
Note that the arrow symbol here is not material implication, but a special
symbol that denotes a “case” in an inductive definition. Such an inductive def-
inition is interpreted under the well-founded semantics [9], which in the case
of a positive definition (such as the one above) boils down to a least-fixpoint
construction. Each rule of such a definition represents a single case in which
the defined predicate holds. In our Python API, we use a lambda-expressionto
represent such a case.
kb.Define([("TC(Node,Node)", "lambda x,y: G(x,y)") ,
("TC(Node,Node)", "lambda x,y:
any(G(x,z) and TC(z,y) for z in Node)")
This both declares the predicate TC and defines it in terms of the “parameter”
G. For definitions consisting of a single rule, a simpler syntax is also allowed:
kb.Define("TC(Node,Node)",
"lambda x,y: G(x,y) or
any(G(x,z) and TC(z,y) for z in Node)")
90
Similar to how an argument of kb.Constraint(.) can also be used as a
simple boolean Python expression, the above lambda-expressioncan be used to
compute the transitive closure of G by an explicit least-fixpoint computation:
def lfp(f , x=[]):
y = f(x)
return y if y == s else f(x)
node pairs = [(x,y) for x in kb.Node for y in kb.Node]
TC = lfp(lambda T: filter (lambda x,y: kb.G(x,y) or
any(kb.G(x,z) and T(z,y) for z in Node) , node pairs))
An advantage of using IDP is that the definition of TC can then not only
be used to compute the transitive closure of a given graph, but also to, e.g.,
compute a graph that would have a given relation as its transitive closure. In
addition, IDP not only supports positive inductive definitions, but also non-
monotone inductive definitions (such as the standard definition of the relation
“|=” in FO), for which a simple least-fixpoint construction does not work.Non-
recursive definitions (which are equivalent to a standard FO equivalence) are
also allowed in IDP. In the latter case, we can of course choose whether to use
the Define or Predicatemethod of our API.
IDP can be configured to use XSB Prolog7 to speed up certain computation
with definitions. We always use this option in the experiments below.
4 Experiments
ThissectionpresentstwoexamplesofourAPI,withaparticularfocusondemon-
strating that the integration into the surrounding Python code can be done in
a natural way.
4.1 Sudoku
The firstexample is a Sudokusolver.A Sudokugridconsists of 9×9=81cells.
sud = KB()
sud.Type("Cell", range(81))
The grid is divided into in rows, columns and nine small 3×3 squares.
sud. Predicate("SameRow(Cell, Cell)",
[ (i , j) for i in sud. Cell for j in sud. Cell
if i / 9 == j / 9 ])
sud. Predicate("SameCol(Cell, Cell)",
[ (i , j) for i in sud. Cell for j in sud. Cell
if i % 9 == j % 9 ])
7 http://xsb.sourceforge.net/
91
sud. Predicate("SameSmallSq(Cell, Cell)",
[ (i , j) for i in sud. Cell for j in sud. Cell
if (i%9)/3 == (j%9)/3 and (i/9)/3 == (j/9)/3 ])
Here,thePythonlistcomprehensionscomputeanenumerationoftheserela-
tions,byiteratingoveralltuplesintheCartesianproductoftheargumenttypes
andcheckinga certainconditionfor eachtuple.Alternatively,we canmakeIDP
dothiswork,byDefiningthepredicateswiththeappropriatelamba-expressions.
sud.Define("SameRow(Cell, Cell)",
"lambda i, j: i / 9 == j / 9")
The cells must be filled with integers from 1 to 9. It will be convenient to
representan empty cell by the number 0, leading to the following type Number.
sud.Type("Number", range(10))
We make use of two functions that map cells to numbers: one records the
problemstatementandtheotheritssolution.Theproblemstatementcomesfrom
a list of numbers, that we convert to a dictionary by means of zip operation.
s=[ 8,5,0, 0,0,2, 4,0,0,
7,2,0, 0,0,0, 0,0,9,
0,0,4, 0,0,0, 0,0,0,
... ... ... ]
sud.Function("Given(Cell):Number",
dict(zip(range(len(s)) , s)))
sud.Function("Sol(Cell): Number")
The function Sol will be computed by IDP, in accordance with the rules of
sudoku. First, we state the difference constraint on the appropriate cells.
sud.Define("Diff(Cell,Cell)", "lambda x,y: x != y and
(SameRow(x,y) or SameCol(x,y) or SameSmallSq(x,y))")
sud.Constraint("all(Sol(x) != Sol(y) for (x,y) in Diff)")
Next, we state that the solution must match the problem statement on all
non-empty cells (i.e., those 6=0), and that it should fill in all cells.
sud.Constraint("all(Sol(x) == Given(x)
for x in Cell if Given(x) != 0)")
sud.Constraint("all(Sol(x) != 0 for x in Cell)")
With this, the sudoku problem is completely specified. The following code
passes the sud.Sol object to a function that pretty-prints the sudoku. Only at
the start of the for-loopin this function is the solution actually computed.
def show(grid):
row = −1
for x in grid.keys():
92
sys.stdout.write(’ ’ if x % 3 == 0 else ’’)
if x % 9 == 0:
row += 1
print (’\n’ if row % 3 else ’’)
print (str(grid[x]) + " ") ,
show(sud.Sol)
We remark that, because we use valid Python expressions to assert con-
straints,wecanusethesameexpressionstocheckthattheoutputindeedsatisfies
the constraints. For instance, at the interactive Python terminal:
>>> all (sud.Sol(x) != sud.Sol(y) for (x,y) in sud. Diff)
True
PeterNorvig has published a sudoku solverwritten entirely in Pythonusing
constraintsolvingtechniques8.Notcountingwhitespaceandcomments,hiscode
tocomputesolutionsisabout40lines,whereasthecodewehavepresentedinthis
section is 12 lines. Moreover,it is easy to replace the existing solvefunction in
hiscodebyacalltoourknowledgebase.Thisrequirestwosmalltransformations:
first,inNorvig’scode,inputgridsaregivenintheformatofasinglestring,where
an empty cell is represented by a dot; second, he produces output in the form
of a dictionary in which the keys are strings of the form Xn with X ∈ A..I
representing the row and n∈1..9 the column.
def solve(sud, grid):
""" Solve sudoku "grid" using the KB "sud". """
def translate(n):
rows = ’ABCDEFGHI’
digits = ’123456789’
return rows[n/9] + digits [n%9]
sud.Given = dict(zip(range(81) ,
[ int(x) for x in grid. replace(’.’,’0’)]))
return dict(zip(map(translate , sud.Sol.keys()) ,
map(str , sud.Sol.values())))
Whenitcomestoruntime,ourversionissignificantlyslowerthantheoriginal
on Norvig’s test set, averaging 0.27s per sudoku versus 0.008s.
At the other end of the spectrum, we can also compare to a naive generate-
and-test approach.Using Python’s powerful itertoolslibrary,this can also be
implementedinabout10linesofcode.(Thecodeusedtotestwhetherasolution
is correct can of course use the same syntactical expressions as those which we
passed to our API.) However,the runtime of such a programis very poor: for a
sudoku with just 5 empty cells (for comparison,a typicalsudoku has around50
to 60), it already takes over a minute to find a solution.
Our main conclusions from this experiment are that, at least in this case:
8 http://norvig.com/sudoku.html
93
– Our API can handle, with a limited amount of overhead, the input/output
format that a typical Python programmer would use;
– Our API can be used to develop useful functionality in significantly fewer
lines ofcode (12 versus40)than a clever Pythonimplementation. In fact, it
takes only as many lines of code as a naive generate-and-test algorithm.
– EventhoughourAPIissignificantlyslowerthanacleverPythonalgorithm,
it still vastly outperforms the naive generate-and-test approach.
4.2 Working with graphs
ThefollowingclassGraphKBextendsthegenericIDPKnowledgeBaseclasswith
somespecificfunctionalityforworkingwithundirectedgraphs.Whenconstruct-
ing such a GraphKB, the nodes of the graph can be initialised by means of a
given set and the edges by means of an adjacency list. The predicate Edge is
Defined as the symmetric closure of the adjacency list. This class also offers a
convenience method to define the transitive closure of relations over this graph.
class GraphKB(IDP):
def init (self , nodes=[0], adj list =[]) :
super(GraphKB, self ). init ()
self .Type("Node", nodes)
self . Predicate("Adjacent(Node,Node)", adj list)
self .Define("Edge(Node,Node)",
"lambda x,y: Adjacent(x,y) or Adjacent(y,x)")
def add TC(self , original , tc name):
formula = "lambda x,y: {0}(x,y) or any({0}(x,z)
and {0}(z,y) for z in Node)".format(original)
self .Define(tc name + "(Node, Node)", formula)
Wecannowcheckifagivenadjacencylistdescribesafullyconnectedgraph:
connected = GraphKB(nodes, adj)
connected.define TC("Path", "Edge")
connected.Constraint("all(Path(x,y)
for x in Node for y in Node)")
if connected. satisfiable :
print "Graph is fully connected"
We can use a similar KB to count the number of connected components in
the graph. We do this by selecting a single representative from each component
(its “Root”)and then counting the number of these representatives.
comp = GraphKB(nodes, adj)
comp.define TC("Path", "Edge")
comp. Predicate("Root(Node)")
94
comp.Constraint("all(any(Path(r,x) for r in Root)
for x in Node if not Root(x))")
comp.Constraint("not any(Path(x,y)
for x in Root for y in Root if x != y)")
print "Number of components: {0}".format(len(comp.Root))
Foragraphwith1000nodesin86connectedcomponents,thisprogramtakes
23s to count the components. By comparison, the popular NetworkX Python
library9 is two orders of magnitude faster, taking only 0.2s.
In graph theory, an undirected graph is called a tree if it is connected and
does not contain cycles. When checking for a cycle in an undirected graph, we
of course have to exclude the trivial two-node cycles that would result from
traversing the same undirected edge in both directions. This in fact makes it
easier to use IDP to check that there is a cycle, than to check that there is
not one. The following knowledge base tries to guess the direction in which to
traverseeachedge in order to produce a cycle. If it is unsatisfiable,there are no
cycles.
cyclic = GraphKB()
cyclic . Predicate("Traverse(Node,Node)")
cyclic .Constraint("all(Edge(x,y) for (x,y) in Traverse)")
cyclic .Constraint("not any(Traverse(y,x)
for (x,y) in Traverse)")
cyclic .define TC("TravTC", "Traverse")
cyclic .Constraint("any(TravTC(x,x) for x in Node)")
We can now combine the two knowledge bases to check whether a given
adjacency list indeed describes a tree.
def is tree(adj list):
cyclic .Adjacent = adj list
connected.Adjacent = adj list
return (bool(connected. satisfiable )
and not bool(cyclic . satisfiable ))
This example illustrates how additional functionality can be built on top of
the KB objects of our API. In addition, the ability to combine the results of
calls to different KBs also allows us to implement functionality that would be
harder to implement in a single IDP KB.
5 Implementation
The implementation of our API and the examples are available for download.10
Interfacingwiththe IDP systemis currentlydonein adecoupledway:whenthe
9 https://networkx.github.io/
10 https://bitbucket.org/joostv/pyidp/admin
95
API detects that the IDP system needs to be called, it prepares a text file with
the appropriatevocabulary,structureand theory,then calles the IDP systemas
an external process and parses its output. The results of this call are cached, so
that the IDP system will not be invoked again until the KB changes.
6 Related work
There is already a long history of work attempting to close the gap between
imperative and declarative programming [1]. We briefly compare our approach
to some recent work in this area.
In [8], an approach is presented in which a constraint solver is not added to
a single host language,but can be used in the developmentof a domain-specific
language in Racket. Like ours, the motivation behind this work is to allow the
power of declarative systems to be more widely used. However, their approach
differs, because they count on an intermediary—the designer of the domain-
specificlanguage—tohidethecomplexityofthedeclarativesystem,whereasour
approach focuses on creating an interface that is natural enough to offer KB
functionality directly.
In[4],aconstraintsolveris integratedintothe Scalalanguage.As oursdoes,
their approach reuses the syntax of the host language to interface with the
declarative system. A key difference is that, in their approach, the programmer
is explicitly manipulating, combining and solving constraints, which makes the
constraint solver more present in the eventual source code. A second difference
is of course that Scala currently appears to be less widely known than Python.
In [5], a reasoner for FO extended with transitive closure is integrated into
Java. Their KB language is therefore very similar to (but more restricted than)
that of IDP. When it comes to the integration in Java, there are two main
differences to our approach. First, the declarative knowledge is not written in
expressionsinthehostlanguage,butinaseparatelanguage(theAlloy-likeJFSL
[10]). Second, the integration into Java is done in an object-oriented way: the
programmerdefines classes in which formulas are added as, among others, class
invariants,methodpre-/postconditionsandframeconditions.Incomparison,our
PythonAPIseemsmorelightweight,sinceitdoesnotrequireanobject-oriented
approach.Whenitcomestocomputationalperformance,[5]reportsgoodresults,
which our implementation is not able to match.
Insummary,ourapproachfillsthenicheofaneasy-to-learnquickprototyping
API, that, due to Python’s current popularity, may speak to a large audience.
7 Conclusions and future work
Whenprototypinganapplication,aprogrammermayencounteracomputational
subproblem for which it would be cumbersome to develop a specific algorithm.
The aim of our API is to allow such gaps to be declaratively stopped with
as little effort as possible. As we have seen, our API might allow a feasible
solution to be produced in only as many lines of code as an (infeasible) naive
96
generate-and-test algorithm. Our use of standard Python objects such as sets
and mappings means that no elaborate setup code is required to plug the KB
into an existing code base, while our use of standard Python expressions for
constraintsanddefinitions leadsto alow learningcurve.Inaddition, boththese
properties also make it easier to eventually remove the KB if a more efficient
solution is required: the same KB that first generated the solution, can later be
used to check its correctness, or its constraints may simply be recuperated in
the form of Python assert-statements.
To prevent changing/removing the KB from leading to code changes else-
where, our API makes all calls to the IDP system automatically, whenever they
are needed. This has the additional benefit of simplifying the API and not forc-
ing the programmer to learn new terminology. A downside is that it is harder
for the programmer to keep track of what is happening when in the program.
Our current implementation of the API is naive in its interfacing with the
IDP system, which happens by passing text files (built each time from skratch)
to an external process. A better integration, which exploits the Lua interface of
IDP, might offer a significant reduction in runtimes. However, since we mainly
intend our API to be used in prototyping, this issue might not be pressing.
Another consequence, which may be more severe, is that programs written in
our API are currently hard to debug: it may be necessary to manually inspect
the textfile thatwaspassedtothe IDPsystem(indebug-mode,the APIalways
sends this to standard output). However, this requires the user to be at least
somewhatfamiliarwithIDPinputsyntax,whichissomethingweaimedtoavoid.
Our validation of the API currently consists only of examples that we have
implemented ourselves. A better test would involve Python programmers who
have no knowledge of IDP or indeed any declarative system. However, better
debugging facilities seem necessary for such a trial to be successful.
97
References
1. KrzysztofR.AptandAndreaSchaerf. Programminginalma-0,orimperativeand
declarative programming reconciled. In FroCos, 1998.
2. M. Bruynooghe, H. Blockeel, B. Bogaerts, B. De Cat, S. De Pooter, J. Jansen,
A.Labarre,J.Ramon,M.Denecker,andS.Verwer. Predicatelogicasamodeling
language:Modeling andsolvingsomemachinelearninganddataminingproblems
with IDP3. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming, 2014. Accepted.
3. Marc Deneckerand Eugenia Ternovska. A logic of nonmonotone inductivedefini-
tions. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 9(2), March 2008.
4. A.K¨oksal, V.Kuncak,and P.Suter. Constraints as control. In POPL’12, 2012.
5. A. Milicevic, D. Rayside, K. Yessenov, and D. Jackson. Unifying execution of
imperative and declarative code. In Proc. 33rd Int’l Conference on Software En-
gineering (ICSE), 2011.
6. David G. Mitchell and Eugenia Ternovska. A framework for representing and
solving NP search problems. In AAAI,pages 430–435, 2005.
7. Shahab Tasharrofi and Eugenia Ternovska. A semantic account for modularity in
multi-language modelling of search problems. In Proc. FroCos, 2011.
8. E. Torlak and R. Bodik. Growing solver aided languages with rosetta. In
Proc.ACMinternational symposiumonNewideas,newparadigms,andreflections
on programming & software, 2013.
9. A.VanGelder,K.A.Ross,andJ.S.Schlipf. Thewell-foundedsemanticsforgeneral
logic programs. Journal of the ACM, 38(3):620–650, 1991.
10. K. Yessenov. A lightweight specification language for bounded program verifica-
tion. Master’s thesis, MIT, 2009.
98
