LSTM-Based Predictions for Proactive Information
Retrieval
Petri Luukkonen, Markus Koskela, Patrik Floréen
HelsinkiInstituteforInformationTechnologyHIIT
DepartmentofComputerScience,UniversityofHelsinki
first.last@helsinki.fi
ABSTRACT
QUERY
EXPANSION We describe a method for proactive information retrieval
LSTM or CONTEXTUAL
TASK PROACTIVE
targeted at retrieving relevant information during a writing INTENT MODEL RECOMMEN-
CONTEXT QUERY
DATIONS
task. In our method, the current task and the needs of the
user are estimated, and the potential next steps are unob-
trusively predicted based on the user’s past actions. We
focus on the task of writing, in which the user is coalescing Figure 1: Overview of the proposed proactive re-
previously collected information into a text. Our proactive trievalsystem,andthecomparisonandbaselinesys-
system automatically recommends the user relevant back- tem used in the experiments.
groundinformation. Theproposedsystemincorporatestext
input prediction using a long short-term memory (LSTM)
network. We present simulations, which show that the sys-
The rationale for using search engines is to find informa-
temisabletoreachhigherprecisionvaluesinanexploratory
tion that helps us in our daily tasks, be they leisure or pro-
searchsettingcomparedtobothabaselineandacomparison
fessional. An ideal search engine would support searching
system.
and identifying useful information that can then be used in
solvingthesetasks[33]. Inproactiveinformationretrieval[5]
CCSConcepts the estimationofthecurrenttask andcontextareutilizedto
proactively retrieve and recommend relevant items. In par-
•Information systems → Query intent; Users and inter-
ticular, this can include associative forms of recall, e.g., in
active retrieval; •Human-centered computing → Text
asituationwheretheuserdoesnotrealizehavingforgotten
input; •Computing methodologies → Neural networks;
about a specific resource [27]. A proactive retrieval system
canbeviewedasadigitalpersonalassistantthatknowsthe
Keywords user’s preferences and aims to provide useful and relevant
information in the current task context.
Task-based Information Retrieval; Proactive Search; Long
Long short-term memory (LSTM) networks [17] have re-
short-term memory networks; Recurrent neural networks;
cently shown remarkable performance in a variety of natu-
Text prediction
ral language processing tasks, including speech recognition
[16], automatic translation [30], image captioning [35] and
1. INTRODUCTION informationretrieval[18,26,28]. LSTMnetworkshavealso
been used to generate various kinds of sequences, including
Proactivesystems[31]anticipatetheneedsoftheuserand
text [15, 29]. In sequence generation, the network is used
predict possible next steps based on the user’s preferences
to process input sequences one at a time and to sample the
and current context. The central component of proactive
nextitemfromtheoutputdistributionofthenetwork. The
systems is the inference engine, which analyzes the current
sampled item is then fed to the network as the next input.
context to provide the highest-ranking suggestions. Proac-
Thiscapabilitytopredictfuturecontinuationsofasequence
tive systems have recently gained popularity, and many of
(viz.textinthiscase)makesLSTMsparticularlyattractive
thecontemporarymajoroperatingsystemsincludeproactive
for proactive information retrieval.
components, e.g., Google Now, Apple Siri, and Microsoft
Atypicalexampleofataskiswritingaboutagiventopic
Cortana.
[24, 27, 33]. In this paper, we propose a method for sup-
portingtheuserbyproactiveinformationretrievalduringa
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofpartorallofthisworkforpersonalor writingtask. AnLSTMnetworkisusedtoexpandtheproac-
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed tivequeriesbypredictingthemostlikelycontinuationsofthe
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitation
current written text. An overview of the proposed method
onthefirstpage.Copyrightsforthird-partycomponentsofthisworkmustbehonored.
Forallotheruses,contacttheowner/author(s). is shown in Figure 1. We present simulated experiments to
Neu-IR ’16 SIGIR Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval, July 21, validate the utility of the LSTM predictions in providing
2016,Pisa,Italy relevant documents, and compare the method to a baseline
(cid:13)c 2016Copyrightheldbytheowner/author(s). and to another method based on user intent modeling.
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows. Inthefollow-
6102
nuJ
02
]RI.sc[
1v73160.6061:viXra
ing section a discussion of related work is provided. In Sec-
tion3wedescribethecomponentsofourproactiveretrieval
system: the query expansion methods (based on an LSTM
andonuserintentmodeling),andtheproactivequerygener-
ation. InSection4wedescribeoursimulationexperiments.
In Section 5 we present our experimental user interface for
providing proactive recommendations based on the current
taskcontext. Theuserinterfaceisusedinforthcominguser
studies. We conclude and discuss future work in Section 6.
2. RELATEDWORK
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and LSTMs in par-
ticular, have recently been used to generate sequences in
various domains, such as music [7], text [15, 29], and hand-
writing[15]. Ininformationretrieval,RNNshavebeenused,
e.g., for extracting sentence-level semantic vectors [26] and
context-aware query suggestion [28]. Other kinds of deep
neural networks have been used to project queries and doc-
umentstolow-dimensionalsemanticspaces[18]andtolearn
fixed-length vectors for variable-length pieces of texts, such
as sentences, paragraphs, and documents [21].
Various types of task activities have been studied in the
literature as a basis for query suggestion or query sup-
port. Motivated by the observation that a notable propor-
tionoftheuser’sinformationneedsweretriggeredbyprevi-
ous web browsing activity, several authors have studied the
correlationbetweenwebbrowsingbehaviorandconsecutive
searches [10, 20, 22]. Another popular approach is to use
previoussearchqueries[9,36]. Ourworkisrelatedtoquery
auto-completion[4],inwhichpossiblecompletionsofsearch
enginequeriesarepredicted. Queryauto-completionforweb
and mobile queries has recently been studied in [25, 34].
Figure 2: A tree is formed from the different con-
A much studied task scenario for intelligent assistants is tinuations estimated from the input word w0. On
writing. The existing work has largely focused on biblio-
each level of the tree, nodes other than k = 3 high-
graphic tasks involved in writing scientific or professional
est scoring ones are pruned out. As the branching
texts[3,23,32]. Thesemostlytargeteithertheplanningor
coefficient is b = 4, there are at most 12 candidates
review phases of writing, as translation, i.e., transforming
on each level before the pruning.
the writer’s mental ideas into sentences, is the most chal-
lenging process in terms of tolerance to undesired disrup-
tions. In [24], the impact of proactive recommendations to
improvetherecommendations,weproposetouseanLSTM-
different phases of the writing process is analyzed. The Re-
based method for query expansion described in Section 3.1.
active Keyboard [11]isanearlyprototypeforpredictingthe
For comparison, we use a method based on estimating user
succeeding words from a user-written text fragment. Com-
intent using a multi-armed bandit model (Section 3.2 and
pleting written sentences has also been studied in [6, 14].
Appendix A). Proactive information retrieval using the ex-
Thesetupofourworkiscloselyrelatedtowhatwasenvi-
pandedqueryisdescribedinSection3.3. Anoverviewofthe
sionedalreadybyRhodesandStarnerintheirRemembrance
proposed method (and the comparison and baseline meth-
Agent (RA) [27]. The user first indexes her personal data,
ods) is shown in Figure 1.
e.g., emails and written notes. RA is then set to run con-
tinuouslyinthebackgroundanddisplayalistofsummaries
3.1 LSTMTextPrediction
of documents that are related to the current document be-
ing read or written. Other similar tools include Watson [8] In LSTM-based query expansion, the most probable con-
andImplicitQuery [12]. Themaindifferenceofourmethod tinuationsareestimatedforthecurrentwrittentextandthe
comparedtothesesystemsistheofuseanLSTM-basedpre- expansion words are selected from these estimated contin-
dictivemodeltoperformqueryexpansion. Wealsocompare uations. For computing the continuations, we use a beam
ourmethodtoabaselineandamethodbasedonuserintent search algorithm [19] described below.
modeling. In this paper, we evaluate our method using a TheLSTMnetworkf isfirsttrainedusingatextcorpus,
simulated writing task, but our method can be applied to like abstracts of scientific articles. The trained network can
othersourcesofcontext,suchaswhatisreadonthescreen. then serve as a model for text generation.
Let us assume the user has written n input words and
denote by w0 the latest word in the input sequence. When
3. METHODFORPROACTIVEIR
given an input word w, the network f will return a proba-
Theproactiverecommendationsproducedbyourmethod bility distribution for the next word, of which we will con-
arebasedonuserinputobservedduringthecurrenttask. To siderthebmostprobablecandidates. Forexample,withthe
Figure 3: Examples of different continuations corresponding the paths in the pruned tree of Figure 2. Words
having the highest scores are selected and added to the query.
branchingcoefficientb=4andw0 =“neural”,thetopcandi- 3.2 UserIntentModel
datesfromf couldbe{w 1 1 =“model”,w 2 1 =“network”,w 3 1 = As a comparison method, we use an upper confidence
“surgery”,w 4 1 =“system”}, where w i j denotes the ith candi- bound algorithm, which is based on estimating the user in-
date for the jth word following the input word w0. The tentusingamulti-armedbanditmodel[13]. Themodelbal-
output probability of the word is denoted as p(w i j). Fur- ances exploration with exploitation and selects words that
ther continuations are computed by using previous candi- havethehighestupperconfidencebound[2]. Thisallowsthe
datewordsasinputtof. Notethattheoutputoff depends user to interact with words that are relevant, but that are
notonlyonthelatestinputword,butonallinputwordsso also uncertain to the model. Further details of the method
far. Thedifferentcontinuationsformatreestructure,where are described in Appendix A.
the root node is the input word w0 from which the contin-
uations or paths evolve (see Figure 2). We denote by d the 3.3 ProactiveQuery
depthofthetree,i.e.,thenumberofwordsintheestimated Whenever resources are retrieved proactively, our system
continuations of the sentence. worksasfollows;forsimplicitywerefertothisasaproactive
Asthesizeofthetreegrowsratherquickly,thenumberof query, despite that there is no explicit query from the user.
generatedpathsiscontrolledbythebeamwidthk,pruning Based on the n input words, our query expansion modules
nodes on each level based on word probabilities on their retrieve n suggested words and add them to the query.
corresponding paths. The path from w0 to w i j is denoted The act e u xp al information retrieval is performed using the
by π(w i j), e.g., in Figure 2, π(w 1 3) = (w0,w 1 1,w 3 2,w 1 3). The Lucene search engine with the standard cosine-similarity
pruning score R(wj) is defined as the product of the word ranking.
i
probabilities on π(wj):
i
R(wj)= (cid:89) p(w(cid:48)) . (1) 4. SIMULATIONEXPERIMENTS
i Inordertotestwhetherourmethodprovidesrelevantdoc-
w(cid:48)∈π(w
i
j)
uments,weperformedtwokindsofsimulationexperiments.
On each level of the tree, nodes other than the k highest Inthesimulations,theinputcorrespondingtotexttheuser
scoring ones are pruned out. After the pruning on level j, types comes from a given document. We perform query ex-
thelevelj+1candidatesareobtainedusingthekremaining pansion with the LSTM-based text prediction method and
words. Figures 2 and 3 show examples of the pruned tree withtheuserintentmodel. Inthebaselineexperiments,we
and the corresponding continuations. use only the written input as the queries.
Continuing our previous example, the second set of es-
4.1 DataSet
timated words following the input word w0 are computed
using the estimated words from the level 1, e.g. when feed- Thesimulationswereperformedusingtheabstractsofthe
ing to network f the word w1 =“system”, the top candi- Computer Science branch of the arXiv1 preprint database,
4
dates returned could be {w2 =“and”,w2 =“that”,w2 = downloaded on October 28, 2015. The branch contains a
9 10 11
“of”,w2 = “is”}. The third level of generated words are total of 40 subcategories, which are used as topics in our
12
computed using the words from the second level and so experiments. AdocumentinthearXivdatabasecanbelong
forth: w2 =“is”→ {w3 =“also”,w3 =“without”,w3 = to several subcategories, i.e., several topics in our case.
12 9 10 11
“proposed”,w3 =“derived”}.
12 4.2 Parameters
Thequeryexpansionisformedfromthewordsremaining
in the pruned tree. First, the words are filtered using a Weusedthemedium LSTMarchitectureofZarembaetal.
standard list of English stop words. The query expansion [37] with an Tensorflow implementation. The network has
score of wi is definedas the product of its idf value and its twolayers,650unitsperlayer,andisunrolledfor35words.
j
probability defined by the model f: AlltheabstractsinthedatasetwereusedtotraintheLSTM
network. The training data consisted of 15M words with a
score(wj)=idf(wj)·p(wj) . (2)
i i i vocabulary of 10k words. Training the network took about
The idf values were computed from the same training data 36 hours using two GeForce GTX TITAN GPUs. Due to
that was used to train the network using the form idf(w)= memory requirements, a random 10% of the abstracts was
N ,whereN isthenumberofdocumentswherethewordw used to form the document term matrix for the user intent
a N p w pearsin,an w dN isthetotalnumberofdocuments. Finally, model.
the n words having the highest scores are added to the IntheLSTM-basedwordprediction,thebeamwidthwas
exp
expanded query. set to k = 80 and the depth to d = 3. The branching
coefficient was set to b=10 and n =10.
exp
1http://arxiv.org/
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
size of context
noisicerp
exploratory search
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
LSTM 0.2
intent model
baseline
0.1
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
size of context
dnuof
smeti
nwonk
known-item search
LSTM
intent model
baseline
Figure 4: Exploratory search document precision (left) and the fraction of known items found (right) for the
LSTM, intent model, and baseline runs.
4.3 ExploratorySearchTask forknown-itemsearch,duetohowthetargetdocumentwas
Wesimulateasettingwhereauseriswritingatextabout selected.
a given topic. We choose at random a document and sim- Second, the results show that the query expansion meth-
ulate inputting sequences of n consecutive words from the ods can improve the precision of the proactively retrieved
text. The variable n serves as the size of the context ex- documents on the exploratory search task. The LSTM-
pressed as the number of words from the written text. For based query expansion improves the results when the con-
instance, if n=3, and the test text is“Machine learning is text is long enough, i.e., when n > 10. The intent model
asubfield”, theinputsequencesfortheproactivesearchen- basedqueryexpansion,ontheotherhand,issuitedforsmall
ginewouldbe“Machinelearningis”,“learningisa”,and“isa context sizes (n < 10). For known-item search, the query
subfield”. Weenvisionasituationwheretheuserhastofind expansion methods are not equally beneficial. The intent
some relevant background resources about the given topic. model again improves the results for small context sizes,
The aim is thus to find other documents about the same but the LSTM-based predictions degrade the results.
topic t as the input document. For the proactive queries The simulation results agree rather well with intuition of
(Section 3.3), we use n input words and n = 10. The thequeryexpansionmethods. Theuserintentmodelbased
exp
Lucene search engine was set to return 10 documents. method expands the query with terms that have high tf-idf
Weuseallthedocumentsinthedatabasebelongingtothe valuesinthesamedocumentsastheinputwords. Itiscon-
same topic as the test document as the target set D . As ceivablethatthisisprimarilyusefulwhentheinputcontext
t
a measure of performance, we use the precision of relevant is small, as the expansion can then bring useful additional
documentswithregardtothetopictoftheinputdocument. information to the query. The LSTM-based query expan-
sion, on the other hand, dynamically models the written
4.4 Known-itemSearchTask contextandcanpredictupcomingwords. Itisunsurprising
that this works better when there is enough input context.
We also run simulations of known-item search, in which
For exploratory search, the predictions made by the LSTM
the purpose is to study a setting where the user needs to
network are accurate enoughto increase the retrieval preci-
re-find a certain previously seen document. The setting is
sion;inknown-itemsearchthetargetissmaller,i.e.,asingle
the same as for the exploratory search task, except that
document, and the predictions are not equally useful.
now we have only one target document in D . We take a
t
randomdocumentasthequeryandperformaLucenesearch
over the rest of the data set to retrieve the highest-scoring 5. USERINTERFACE
document. Thisisnowourtargetdocument. Notethatthe Our research calls for a user study in order to assess the
targetdocumentisthusadifferentdocumentthanourinput usefulnessoftheproactivesearchresultsinreal-worldtasks.
document, and in the simulation we either find the target For this reason we have implemented an experimental user
document or not. interfaceintendedtobeshowninacornerofthescreen,dis-
playing the proactive recommendations; see Figure 5. The
4.5 Results
interface is designed to allow the user to maintain her fo-
Figure4showstheresultsofthesimulations. Ontheleft- cusonthecurrenttaskathand,whileofferingperipherally-
hand side, the retrieval precision in the exploratory search shown contextual recommendations. Any data source, e.g.,
task is shown. The right-hand figure shows the fractions the user’s own emails, a database of documents, or any
of known items found in the known-item search task. First web pages, can be used as information to be proactively
of all, as expected, in both tasks the results improve as the retrieved. In Figure 5, the resources displayed are arXiv
sizeofthecontextincreases. Thiswasespeciallyanticipated preprints.
Figure 5: The user interface of the experimental application displaying proactive recommendations. The
words in the green boxes on the left indicate the written input words (“long short term”). The predictions
by the LSTM network are shown in the white boxes.
Forobtainingthecurrentwritingcontext,wehaveimple- thecontextdatacanbeextractedfromseveralsources,such
mented a specific text editor, which transmits the current asawordprocessingsoftware,PDFreader,orwebbrowser.
word surrounding the text cursor at each keypress to the The only requirement for the context data is that it has to
proactive search application; this way the input of n words be in textual form.
graduallybuildsup. Similarly,thecontextcouldbededuced
from, e.g., the text read in a web browser.
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
By clicking on any of the resources, its contents (i.e., the
corresponding arXiv page in the setting of Figure 5) are This work has been partly supported by the Finnish
shown in a regular web browser. Funding Agency for Innovation (project Re:Know) and the
Academy of Finland (Finnish Centre of Excellence in Com-
putational Inference Research COIN, 251170).
6. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSIONS
We have described a method for query expansion to en- 8. REFERENCES
hanceproactiveinformationretrieval. Themethodisbased
[1] K.Athukorala,A.Medlar,K.Ilves,andD.Glowacka.
on predicting the most likely continuations of the current Balancingexplorationandexploitation: Empirical
input using an LSTM network. parameterizationofexploratorysearchsystems.InProc.
The performed experiments provide evidence that our CIKM,pages1703–1706,2015.
method is able to proactively produce relevant resources. [2] P.Auer.Usingconfidenceboundsfor
The query expansion computed using an LSTM network exploitation-explorationtrade-offs.J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
3:397–422,Mar.2003.
improved retrieval precision in an exploratory search task,
[3] T.Babaian,B.J.Grosz,andS.M.Shieber.Awriter’s
whenenoughcontextdataisavailable. Theresultswiththe
collaborativeassistant.InProc. IUI,pages7–14,2002.
method used as comparison, based on user intent model-
[4] H.BastandI.Weber.Typeless,findmore: Fast
ing using an upper confidence bound algorithm, were par- autocompletionsearchwithasuccinctindex.InProc.
tially complementary, improving the results when only lim- SIGIR,pages364–371,2006.
ited context is available. This naturally suggests a further [5] S.Bhatia,D.Majumdar,andN.Aggarwal.Proactive
studyoncombiningthetwoqueryexpansionmethods. Fur- informationretrieval: Anticipatingusers’informationneed.
ther experiments with different kinds of datasets and tasks InProc. ECIR,pages874–877.2016.
[6] S.Bickel,P.Haider,andT.Scheffer.Learningtocomplete
are in any case needed to validate the results.
sentences.InProc. ECML,pages497–504.2005.
In this work, we concentrated on the writing task. We
[7] N.Boulanger-Lewandowski,Y.Bengio,andP.Vincent.
introducedasimpleuserinterfaceforshowingtheproactive
Modelingtemporaldependenciesinhigh-dimensional
search results based on the written context received from sequences: Applicationtopolyphonicmusicgenerationand
a dedicated text editor. The text predictions produced by transcription.InProc. ICML,pages1159–1166,2012.
the LSTM network could also be used to to automatically [8] J.Budzik,K.Hammond,andL.Birnbaum.Information
suggestdifferentcontinuationsforthecurrentlywrittentext, accessincontext.Knowledge-Based Systems,
as in the Reactive Keyboard [11], [6], or [14]. Furthermore, 14(1–2):37–53,2001.
[9] H.Cao,D.H.Hu,D.Shen,D.Jiang,J.-T.Sun,E.Chen,
userstudieswheretheusersareperformingreal-worldtasks
andQ.Yang.Context-awarequeryclassification.InProc.
need to be carried out.
SIGIR,pages3–10,2009.
Finally, in contrast to many of the existing methods
[10] Z.Cheng,B.Gao,andT.-Y.Liu.Activelypredicting
for producing proactive recommendations, the proposed diversesearchintentfromuserbrowsingbehaviors.InProc.
method generalizes the context gathering in the sense that WWW,pages221–230,2010.
[11] J.J.Darragh,I.H.Witten,andM.L.James.TheReactive 143–152,2016.
Keyboard: Apredictivetypingaid.Computer, [35] O.Vinyals,A.Toshev,S.Bengio,andD.Erhan.Showand
23(11):41–49,1990. tell: Aneuralimagecaptiongenerator.InProc. CVPR,
[12] S.Dumais,E.Cutrell,R.Sarin,andE.Horvitz.Implicit pages3156–3164,2015.
queries(IQ)forcontextualizedsearch.InProc. SIGIR, [36] B.Xiang,D.Jiang,J.Pei,X.Sun,E.Chen,andH.Li.
pages594–594,2004. Context-awarerankinginwebsearch.InProc. SIGIR,
[13] D.Glowacka,T.Ruotsalo,K.Konuyshkova,S.Kaski, pages451–458,2010.
G.Jacucci,etal.Directingexploratorysearch: [37] W.Zaremba,I.Sutskever,andO.Vinyals.Recurrent
Reinforcementlearningfromuserinteractionswith neuralnetworkregularization.arXiv preprint
keywords.InProc. IUI,pages117–128,2013. arXiv:1409.2329,2014.
[14] K.GrabskiandT.Scheffer.Sentencecompletion.InProc.
SIGIR,pages433–439,2004. APPENDIX
[15] A.Graves.Generatingsequenceswithrecurrentneural
networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850,2013. A. USERINTENTMODEL
[16] A.Graves,A.r.Mohamed,andG.Hinton.Speech
recognitionwithdeeprecurrentneuralnetworks.InProc For computing the user intent model, we use a training
ICASSP,pages6645–6649,2013. database consisting of M documents, from which N unique
[17] S.HochreiterandJ.Schmidhuber.Longshort-term words are extracted by excluding stop words. The jth doc-
memory.Neural Computation,9(8):1735–1780,1997. ument in the database is represented by a feature vector
[18] P.-S.Huang,X.He,J.Gao,L.Deng,A.Acero,and x ∈ RN where x is the tf-idf value of the ith word. We
j ij
L.Heck.Learningdeepstructuredsemanticmodelsforweb denotebyX ∈RN×M thetf-idf matrixoftheM documents,
searchusingclickthroughdata.InProc. CIKM,pages
where each column of X corresponds to one document fea-
2333–2338,2013.
ture vector and each row corresponds to a distribution of
[19] P.Koehn.Statistical machine translation.Cambridge
UniversityPress,2009. the words over the documents.
[20] W.Kong,R.Li,J.Luo,A.Zhang,Y.Chang,andJ.Allan. The user intent model is estimated using the context
Predictingsearchintentbasedonpre-searchcontext.In formed using n previously written words. Based on this in-
Proc. SIGIR,pages503–512,2015. put,asetofwordweightsarecomputedbyusingtheLinRel
[21] Q.V.LeandT.Mikolov.Distributedrepresentationsof algorithm proposed in [2].
sentencesanddocuments.arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.4053,
We denote the relevance vector of observed words by y∈
2014.
[0,1]N , where y = 1 corresponds to having observed the
[22] D.J.Liebling,P.N.Bennett,andR.W.White. i
ithwordintheinput. Iftheithworddoesnotoccurinthe
Anticipatorysearch: Usingcontexttoinitiatesearch.In
Proc. SIGIR,pages1035–1036,2012. subsequentinputwords,itsrelevancevaluestartsdecreasing
[23] A.Livne,V.Gokuladas,J.Teevan,S.T.Dumais,and such that y i =n− i 1, where n i is the number of sets of input
E.Adar.Citesight: Supportingcontextualcitation wordssincethelastoccurrenceoftheithword. Foromitting
recommendationusingdifferentialsearch.InProc. SIGIR, words having very low relevance values, we use a threshold
pages807–816,2014.
τ =0.1: when y <τ the value of y is set to zero.
i i
[24] M.C.P.Melguizo,L.Boves,andO.M.Ramos.A
The observed values in y, corresponding to the input
proactiverecommendationsystemforwriting: Helping
words so far, are assumed to be formed from the model
withoutdisrupting.International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics,39(3):516–523,2009.
y=Xwˆ , (3)
[25] B.MitraandN.Craswell.Queryauto-completionforrare
prefixes.InProc. CIKM,pages1755–1758,2015. where wˆ ∈ RM is the estimated user intent model describ-
[26] H.Palangi,L.Deng,Y.Shen,J.Gao,X.He,J.Chen, ing what documents from the training set are currently es-
X.Song,andR.Ward.Deepsentenceembeddingusing
timated to be relevant for the user.
longshort-termmemorynetworks.arXiv:1502.06922,2015.
Given y and X, the user model wˆ can be obtained as
[27] B.RhodesandT.Starner.RemembranceAgent: A
continuouslyrunningautomatedinformationretrieval wˆ=(XTX+µI)−1XTy , (4)
system.InProc. PAAM96,pages487–495,1996.
[28] A.Sordoni,Y.Bengio,H.Vahabi,C.Lioma, where I is an identity matrix of size M×M and µ≥0 is a
J.GrueSimonsen,andJ.-Y.Nie.Ahierarchicalrecurrent regularizationparameter,settoµ=1.0inourexperiments.
encoder-decoderforgenerativecontext-awarequery UsingEq.(4)therelevanceestimateyˆofthewordsinthe
suggestion.InProc. CIKM,pages553–562,2015.
vocabulary is computed as
[29] I.Sutskever,J.Martens,andG.E.Hinton.Generatingtext
withrecurrentneuralnetworks.InProc. ICML,pages yˆ=Xwˆ=X(XTX+µI)−1XTy=Ay (5)
1017–1024,2011.
[30] I.Sutskever,O.Vinyals,andQ.V.Le.Sequenceto and the upper bound of the standard deviation of yˆ i as
sequencelearningwithneuralnetworks.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.3215,2014. σˆ i =(cid:107)row i (A)(cid:107)2. (6)
[31] D.Tennenhouse.Proactivecomputing.Commun. ACM,
The n words to be included in the expanded query
43(5):43–50,May2000. exp
correspond to the n maximum components of the vector
[32] M.B.Twidale,A.A.Gruzd,andD.M.Nichols.Writingin exp
thelibrary: Exploringtighterintegrationofdigitallibrary
v=yˆ+cσˆ, (7)
usewiththewritingprocess.Information Processing &
Management,44(2):558–580,2008. with words appearing in the input excluded. Here c ≥ 0
[33] P.Vakkari.Atheoryofthetask-basedinformationretrieval is the exploration/exploitation parameter controlling the
process: asummaryandgeneralizationofalongitudinal
trade-off between exploring the search space (large c) and
study.Journal of Documentation,57(1):44–60,2001.
focusing on the currently most promising region (small c).
[34] S.Vargas,R.Blanco,andP.Mika.Term-by-termquery
We use here c=1.0 as recommended in the literature [1].
auto-completionformobilesearch.InProc. WSDM,pages
