Maintenance of Structural Hole Spanners in
Dynamic Networks
Diksha Goel Hong Shen
School of Computer Science School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Adelaide, Australia Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
diksha.goel@adelaide.edu.au shenh3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Hui Tian Mingyu Guo
School of Information and Communication Technology School of Computer Science
Griffith University, Australia University of Adelaide, Australia
hui.tian@griffith.edu.au mingyu.guo@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract—Structural Hole (SH) spanners are the set of users
who bridge different groups of users and are vital in numerous
applications. Despite their importance, existing work for iden-
tifying SH spanners focuses only on static networks. However,
real-world networks are highly dynamic where the underlying
structure of the network evolves continuously. Consequently, we
studySHspannerproblemfordynamicnetworks.Weproposean
efficientsolutionforupdatingSHspannersindynamicnetworks.
Our solution reuses the information obtained during the initial
runs of the static algorithm and avoids the recomputations for
the nodes unaffected by the updates. Experimental results show
that the proposed solution achieves a minimum speedup of 3.24
over recomputation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
firstattempttoaddresstheproblemofmaintainingSHspanners
in dynamic networks. Fig.1. Illustrationofstructuralholespanners.
Keywords—Structuralholespanners;dynamicnetworks;pair-
wise connectivity; connected components.
them can prevent the spread of rumors in other communities.
Several studies [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have been conducted for
I. INTRODUCTION
discovering SH spanners in static networks. However, real-
Over the past few years, various large-scale networks have world networks are highly dynamic and change rapidly. As
emerged, such as collaboration networks, social networks, a result, identified SH spanners change, and therefore, it is
etc. The topological structure of these networks exhibits a crucial to track updated spanners in the evolving networks.
community structure where the nodes are tightly connected We study SH spanner problem for the dynamic networks. We
within the community. The presence of community structure define SH spanner as a node whose removal minimizes the
in the network leads to the formation of structural holes, pairwise connectivity of the residual network. This definition
whicharethegapsformedduetolackofconnectivitybetween aims to capture the nodes that are located between other-
the communities [1]. It has been shown that the information wise disconnected groups of nodes. While the traditional SH
circulatedwithinthecommunitytendstobesimilar.Therefore, spanner problem focuses on discovering the spanner nodes
the presence of SH between the communities leads to the that minimize the pairwise connectivity of the network, the
redundant flow of information within the community. Hence, SH spanner tracking problem aims to update the previously
a community needs to have connectivity with different com- identified spanner nodes as the network evolves. This paper
munities to access novel information. SH spanners are those proposesanefficientsolutionthatmaintainstop-kSHspanners
individuals who fill structural holes by acting as a bridge for decremental edge updates in the network. Our solution
betweendifferentcommunitiesthatareotherwisedisconnected performsgreedyexchange,eachtimereplacinganoldspanner
[1]. Figure 1 illustrates the SH spanners in the network. node with a high score node from the network.
SH spanners have numerous real-world applications such as Our contributions can be summarized as follows. First,
informationdiffusion,preventingthespreadofrumours,com- we study SH spanner problem for dynamic networks and
munity detection, etc. For example, identifying SH spanners formulate Structural hole Spanner Tracking (SST) problem.
in the network and filtering the information passing through We then propose an efficient solution for SST problem that
5202
beF
71
]IS.sc[
1v69311.2052:viXra
maintains spanner nodes for single decremental edge updates
(cid:88)
inthenetworkbydiscoveringasetofaffectednodes.Wealso P(G)= u(i,j) (1)
design a method to compute the pairwise connectivity score i,j∈V×V,i̸=j
of the nodes efficiently. We evaluate the performance of the
Pairwise connectivity score c(i) of node i is the contribution
proposed solution by conducting extensive experiments, and
ofnodeitothetotalpairwiseconnectivityscoreofthegraph.
the results demonstrate that our solution achieves a minimum
Pairwise connectivity score c(i) of node i is calculated as
speedup of 3.24 over recomputation.
follows:
II. RELATEDWORK c(i)=P(G)−P(G\{i}) (2)
SHtheorywasfirststudiedbyBurt[9]toidentifythecritical B. Structural Hole Spanner Problem
personnel in the company to integrate various operations.
Structural Hole Spanner Problem. Given a graph G =
Goyal et al. [4] designed a model to illustrate how a node
(V,E), and a positive integer k, SH spanner problem is to
act as a SH spanner in the network. They formulated the
identify a set of spanners Top-k in G(V,E), where Top-k
SH spanner problem as a set of nodes that pass through
⊂ V and |Top-k| = k, such that the removal of nodes in
numerous shortest paths between distinct pair of nodes. Tang
Top-k from G minimizes the total pairwise connectivity in
etal.[8]designeda2-stepmechanismtoidentifySHspanners.
the residual subgraph G(V\Top-k).
For every node, the model only considers the shortest paths
having length two, on which the node resides, and the rest
Top-k =min {P(G\Top-k)} (3)
of the paths are ignored. Rezvani et al. [2] designed several
heuristics and argued that eliminating those nodes that bridge where Top-k ⊂ V and |Top-k|=k.
multiple communities results in an increase in the sum of all-
pairshortestdistanceinthenetwork.Basedon[2],Xuetal.[6] Algorithm 1 Structural hole spanner identification.
designed fast and scalable algorithms for identifying spanner Input: Graph G(V,E), k
nodes. Gong et al. [3] designed a machine learning model to Output: top-k spanner set Top-k
discover SH spanners in the online social network. Burt [10] 1: Initialize Top-k =ϕ
studied the correlation between the strength of the links with 2: while |Top-k|<k do
which a node is connected to its bridged communities and 3: v′ =argmax v∈V c(v)
the bridging advantage of that node. Based on [10], Xu et 4: G=G\{v′}
al. [7] designed maxBlock algorithm to discover SH spanners 5: Top-k =Top-k (cid:83) {v′}
that connect many communities and have substantial relations 6: end while
with these communities. Lou et al. [1] designed a model to 7: return Top-k
discover SH spanners and argued that eliminating the SH
spanners from the network leads to a decrease in the minimal Algorithm 1 presents a heuristic approach for discovering
cut of the communities. The model requires prior community the SH spanners in the static network. The algorithm works
informationhowever,communityidentificationisanexpensive by repeatedly selecting a node v′ with a maximum pairwise
process. He et al. [5] designed a model that jointly discovers connectivityscore,whichminimizesthetotalpairwiseconnec-
communities and SH spanners. tivityoftheresidualnetworkwhenremovedfromthenetwork.
III. PRELIMINARIESANDPROBLEMSTATEMENT C. Structural Hole Spanner Tracking Problem
A. Network Model Structural Hole Spanner Tracking (SST) Problem. Given
A network can be modeled as an undirected graph1 G = a graph G = (V,E), spanner set Top-k, and edge update
(V,E), where V and E are the set of nodes and edges in the ∆E, SST problem is to identify a spanner set Top′-k with
network. Let n = |V| and m = |E| denotes the number of cardinality k in G′(V,E+∆E) by updating Top-k such that
nodes and edges in the graph, respectively. A path p from the removal of nodes in Top′-k from G′ minimizes the total
ij
node i to j in an undirected graph G is a sequence of nodes pairwise connectivity in the residual subgraph G′(V\Top′-k).
{v ,v ,...,v } such that each pair (v ,v ) is an edge in A naive solution for SST problem is to apply algorithm
i i+1 j i i+1
E. A pair of nodes i, j ∈ V is connected if there is a path 1 after every update, which will return the new SH spanner
between i and j. A connected component or component C in set. However, this solution is computationally expensive. This
an undirected graph G is a maximal set of nodes in which paper focuses on updating top-k spanners without explicitly
a path connects each pair of node. The pairwise connectivity running algorithm 1 after every update.
u(i,j) for any node pair (i,j) ∈ V ×V is quantified as 1 if
IV. PROPOSEDSOLUTION
node i and j are connected, and 0 otherwise.
Total pairwise connectivity P(G), i.e., pairwise connectivity We propose an efficient solution that maintains top-k span-
ners in the dynamic network. Instead of constructing the
across all node pairs in the graph, is given by:
spanner set from the ground, we start from old Top-k and
1Weconsideronlygraphswithoutself-loopsormultipleedges. repeatedly update it.
A. Finding Affected Nodes the nodes in the component containing node g and node h
changes, i.e., c(r)̸=c′(r)∀r ∈C(g) or C(h).
Whenever there is an edge update in the network, by
identifying the set of affected nodes, we need to recompute
C. Fast Computation of Pairwise Connectivity Score
thescoresofthesenodesonly.Whenanedge(x,y)isdeleted
With the change in the structure of the network, it is
from the network, affected nodes A are the nodes reachable
important to update the pairwise connectivity score of the
from node x, in case edge (x,y) is non-bridge. On the other
affected nodes. Let v ∈ R be a set of nodes not reachable
hand, if edge (x,y) is a bridge, we have two sets of affected
from node i. Therefore, nodes in R do not contribute to the
nodesA andA ,representingthenodesreachablefromnode
x y
pairwiseconnectivityscoreofnodei.Hence,itisnotrequired
x and y, respectively. Let G(V,E) be the original network,
to traverse the whole network to compute the score of node i
as shown in Figure 2(a), and Figure 2(b) shows the updated
networkG′ =G(V,E\(g,h)).Whenanedge(g,h)isdeleted (as in equation 2), instead traversing the component to which
node i belongs is sufficient. Updated pairwise connectivity
from G, the score of nodes {f,g,k,l,h,i,j,m} changes as
score for node i can be calculated as:
showninFigure2(b),andthesenodesarecalledaffectednodes
whereasscoreofthenodes{a,b,c,d,e}doesnotchange,and
therefore, these nodes are unaffected. c(i)=P(C(i))−P(C(i)\{i}) (4)
Here, P(C(i)) denotes the pairwise connectivity score of the
component containing node i.
D. Updating top-k Spanners
This section discusses the procedure for updating top-k
spanners. We use Algorithm 1 to obtain the initial spanner set
and pairwise connectivity score of the nodes in the original
network. In addition, we use max-heap priority queue Q,
where the nodes are sorted by their pairwise connectivity
score. Besides, we have maintained min-heap priority queue
for the spanner nodes in Top-k.
Lemma 2. Given a graph G = (V,E) and an edge update
(a,b), if the deleted edge (a,b) is a non-bridge edge, then
c′(v)≥c(v), ∀v ∈A.
Lemma 3. Given a graph G = (V,E) and an edge update
(a,b), if the deleted edge (a,b) is a bridge edge, then
Fig. 2. Illustration of affected and unaffected nodes due to updates in the c′(v)<c(v), ∀v ∈A.
network(a)Originalnetwork(b)Updatednetwork. When an edge (a,b) is deleted from the network, it is
first determined if it is a bridge or non-bridge edge. We then
Lemma 1. Given a graph G = (V,E) and an edge update identifythesetofaffectednodesusingtheprocedurediscussed
(a,b), any node v ∈ V is an affected node if u(v,a) = 1 in Section IV(A). We compute the new pairwise connectivity
or u(v,b) = 1, resulting in c(v) before deletion not equal to score of the affected nodes using equation 4 and update the
c′(v) after deletion. Otherwise, the node is unaffected. score of these nodes in the priority queue Q. The score of
Here, c′(v) is the pairwise connectivity score of node v in the nodes in Top-k may also changes due to updates in the
updated graph G′. network,andtherefore,weneedtoupdatethescoreofaffected
nodes in Top-k.
B. Various Cases for Edge Deletion
Oncewehaveupdatedscoreofallthenodes,weupdatethe
In this section, we discuss various cases due to the deletion Top-k spannerset.Letw denotesthenodewiththemaximum
of an edge from the network. scoreinQ.Now,wecomparethescoreofwwiththeminimum
Case 1: No change in connected component (Non-bridge score node in Top-k, and if c(w) ≤ Top-k.getMin(), we
edge) terminate the process and return Top-k. In contrast, if c(w)>
When the deleted edge (a,b) is non-bridge, then there is no Top-k.getMin(), and node w is already present in Top-k, we
change in the connected components of the updated network. remove w from the network and update score of the nodes in
Node a and b still belong to the same connected component the component containing node w in Q. On the other hand,
andthescoreofonlyfewnodesinthecomponentchanges,i.e., if node w is not present in Top-k, we remove the minimum
c(r) ̸= c′(r), r ∈ C(a). Here, C(a) represents the connected score node from Top-k and add node w to Top-k. Finally, w
component containing node a. is removed from G, and the score of the nodes in the priority
Case 2: Split connected component (Bridge edge) queue is updated. The process for updating top-k spanner is
When edge (g,h) is a bridge, its deletion splits the connected repeated for a maximum of k times or earlier, incase the
component into two new connected components. The score of procedure terminates.
V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS has been observed that the speedup also increases with the
sizeofthenetwork.Forasmallsizenetwork(Karatedataset),
This section analyses the performance of the proposed
the speedup is 3.92 for k = 5. In contrast, for the same value
solution. We implemented our method in Python 3.7. The
of k, the speedup increases significantly to 11.16 for the large
experiments are performed on Window 10 PC with CPU
size network (HC-BIOGRID dataset).
3.20 GHz and 16 GB RAM. We analyse the performance
of the proposed solution on four real networks, Karate2, VI. CONCLUSION
Dolphins3, American College Football4, and HC-BIOGRID5.
This paper studied the SH spanner identification problem
The characteristics of the datasets are summarized in Table I.
forthedynamicnetworks,namelySSTproblem.Weproposed
an efficient solution for SST problem that maintains top-k
TABLEI spanners dynamically by identifying the set of affected nodes
SUMMARYOFREALDATASETS.
whose pairwise connectivity score changes due to updates in
Dataset Nodes Edges Avg.degree thenetwork.Wealsodesignedafastmechanismforcomputing
Karate 34 78 4 the pairwise connectivity score of the nodes. We analysed the
Dolphins 62 159 5 performance of our solution experimentally and showed that
Football 115 613 10
the proposed single edge update solution speedup the process
HC-BIOGRID 4039 14342 7
by a minimum factor of 3.24 over recomputation.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed solution, we VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
compare it against static recomputation. Table II shows the This work was completed under Australian Government
speedup achieved by the proposed solution over recompu- Research Training Program Scholarship at the University of
tation. Here, speedup is the ratio of the run time of static Adelaide. It is supported by Key-Area Research and Devel-
recomputation to the dynamic solution. In order to determine opment Plan of Guangdong Province #2020B010164003. The
how the two solutions (static and proposed dynamic solution) corresponding author is Hong Shen.
performforthedynamicnetwork,westartwithafullnetwork
REFERENCES
and randomly remove 50 edges, one at a time. We then
[1] T. Lou and J. Tang, “Mining structural hole spanners
compute the geometric mean of the speedup for the proposed
through information diffusion in social networks,” in
solution in terms of its execution time against the static
WWW, 2013, pp. 825–836.
recomputation. The column Gmean, Min and Max contain
[2] M. Rezvani, W. Liang, W. Xu, and C. Liu, “Identifying
geometric mean of the speedup (over 50 edge deletions),
top-k structural hole spanners in large-scale social net-
minimum speedup, and maximum speedup achieved.
works,” in CIKM, 2015, pp. 263–272.
[3] Q. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Wang, and Y. Chen, “Identifying
TABLEII
structural hole spanners in online social networks using
SPEEDUPONRECOMPUTATIONONREALDATASETS.
machine learning,” in SIGCOMM, 2019, pp. 93–95.
Dataset k=1 k=5 [4] S.GoyalandF.Vega-Redondo,“Structuralholesinsocial
Gmean Min Max Gmean Min Max
networks,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 137, no. 1,
Karate 2.35 1.73 3.1 3.92 2.98 4.18
pp. 460–492, 2007.
Dolphins 3.34 2.11 4.18 4.16 3.06 5.33
Football 3.72 3.42 4.21 10.17 9.6 11.47 [5] L. He, C.-T. Lu, J. Ma, J. Cao, L. Shen, and P. S. Yu,
HC-BIOGRID 3.76 1.85 4.11 11.16 10.21 11.89 “Joint community and structural hole spanner detection
Mean(Geometric) 3.24 2.19 3.87 6.56 5.47 7.42 via harmonic modularity,” in SIGKDD, 2016, pp. 875–
884.
We run our solution for 2 different values of k, i.e., k = [6] W.Xu,M.Rezvani,W.Liang,J.X.Yu,andC.Liu,“Ef-
1 and 5. For real networks, the gmean speedup is always at ficientalgorithmsfortheidentificationoftop-kstructural
least 2.35 for k = 1 and 3.92 for k = 5. The experimental hole spanners in large social networks,” TKDE, vol. 29,
resultsdemonstratethatspeedupincreaseswiththevalueofk. no. 5, pp. 1017–1030, 2017.
The average speedup reaches 11.16 for k = 5 from a speedup [7] W. Xu, T. Li, W. Liang, J. X. Yu, N. Yang, and S. Gao,
of 3.76 for k = 1 (HC-BIOGRID dataset), which shows a “Identifying structural hole spanners to maximally block
significant improvement for a larger value of k. The average informationpropagation,”InformationSciences,vol.505,
speedupoveralltesteddatasetsis3.24fork=1and6.56fork pp. 100–126, 2019.
=5.Theminimumspeedupachievedbytheproposedsolution [8] J. Tang, T. Lou, and J. Kleinberg, “Inferring social ties
is 1.73 for the Karate dataset, and the maximum speedup across heterogenous networks,” in WSDM, 2012, pp.
achieved is 11.89 for HC-BIOGRID dataset. In addition, it 743–752.
[9] R. S. Burt, Structural holes: The social structure of
2http://www-personal.umich.edu/∼mejn/netdata/karate.zip
competition. Harvard university press, 2009.
3http://www-personal.umich.edu/∼mejn/netdata/dolphins.zip
4http://www-personal.umich.edu/∼mejn/netdata/football.zip [10] R. Burt, “Structural holes in virtual worlds,” Chicago,
5https://www.pilucrescenzi.it/wp/networks/biological/ IL: University of Chicago, 2011.
