Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does
the Loss Function matter?
Deep Patel and P S Sastry
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India - 560012
{deeppatel,sastry}@iisc.ac.in
Abstract. Deep Neural Networks, often owing to the overparameteri-
zation, are shown to be capable of exactly memorizing even randomly
labelled data. Empirical studies have also shown that none of the stan-
dard regularization techniques mitigate such overfitting. We investigate
whether choice of loss function can affect this memorization. We em-
piricallyshow,withbenchmarkdatasetsMNISTandCIFAR-10,thata
symmetriclossfunctionasopposedtoeithercrossentropyorsquareder-
rorlossresultsinsignificantimprovementintheabilityofthenetworkto
resistsuchoverfitting.Wethenprovideaformaldefinitionforrobustness
tomemorizationandprovidetheoreticalexplanationastowhythesym-
metric losses provide this robustness. Our results clearly bring out the
role loss functions alone can play in this phenomenon of memorization.
Keywords: memorization·deepnetworks·randomlabels·symmetric
losses
1 Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have been remarkably successful in a variety of classi-
fication problems involving image, text or speech data [12,18,20,21,24]. This
is remarkable because these networks often have a large number of parameters
and are trained on data sets that are not large enough for the sizes of these
networks. This raises many questions about the (unreasonable) effectiveness of
deep networks in applications and whether they can go wrong on some kind of
data sets.
In an interesting recent study, [25] showed that standard deep network ar-
chitectures are highly susceptible to extreme overfitting. They show that when
one randomly alters class labels in the training data, these networks can learn
the random labels almost exactly (with the gradient based learning algorithm
driving the training error to near zero). It is seen that this memorization of
the training examples cannot be mitigated through any of the standard regu-
larization techniques such as weight decay or dropout. These results seem to
imply that the usual complexity measures of statistical learning theory are in-
adequate to understand the learning dynamics of deep neural networks. In a
Accepted at Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(PAKDD-2021), New Delhi, India
1202
luJ
22
]GL.sc[
2v75990.7012:viXra
2 Patel, D et al.
further study, [1] investigates this phenomenon more closely. While their study
also confirms this memorization, they formulate some characterizations under
which the learning dynamics of a network differ for the two cases of learning
from real data and random data. Their study suggests that the data may be
playing a vital role in resisting brute-force memorization by a network. While
these studies experiment with many scenarios of regularization techniques and
randomization of data, the role that the loss function itself can play in this has
not been investigated. Motivated by this, here we present some experiments to
showthatalossfunctioncanalsoplayasignificantroleinpreventinganetwork
from memorizing data.
Neuralnetworksareuniversalapproximators[8]andnetworkswithsufficient
parameters have the capacity to exactly represent any finite amount of data
[25]. Such results show that there exist parameter values that can represent any
arbitrary function. However, as discussed in [1], what a network learns depends
on the parameter values that a gradient-based learning algorithm can reach
starting from some random initial parameter values. This learning dynamics is
certainly affected, among other factors, by the loss function because the loss
functiondeterminesthetopographyoftheempiricalrisk,whichisminimizedby
the learning algorithm. Hence, it would be interesting to investigate whether it
is possible to have loss functions that can inherently resist (to some degree) the
memorization of data by a network.
Here we present some experimental results for benchmark datasets, MNIST
[14] and CIFAR-10 [11], with labels randomly changed with different probabili-
ties. We see that for varying probabilities of random labelling, networks trained
with standard loss functions such as categorical cross entropy (CCE) or mean
square error (MSE) exhibit memorization by reaching close to zero training er-
ror. Then, we investigate learning these same networks using a special class of
lossfunctions–symmetric loss functions.Wespecificallyusetheso-calledrobust
logloss (RLL)[13]–whichisobtainedbymodifyingCCE–thoughwealsocom-
ment on other similar loss functions. We show that keeping everything else in
the training algorithm same but changing the loss function alone results in the
network significantly resisting overfitting. With these loss functions the training
error saturates at a level much above zero (depending on the amount of random
labelflipping).Wealsoseethatthelearningdynamicswiththesesymmetricloss
functions resembles more of what one expects with the clean, real data. It was
suggested in [1] that, with real data, the networks try to fit the patterns in the
data rather than memorizing the data, while with randomly flipped labels the
networks seem to be using brute-force memorization. We show that with fairly
high(thoughlessthan100%)randomizationoflabelsintrainingdata,networks
trained withCCE or MSEloss seem to be using brute-force memorizationwhile
the same networks trained with the symmetric loss, RLL, seem to be resisting
such memorization by trying to fit mainly the clean part of the data. This ade-
quately demonstrates that the loss function also has an important role to play
in resisting this type of memorization of data.
Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does the Loss Function matter? 3
Wealsopresentsometheoreticaljustification(usingtheknownpropertiesof
thesesymmetriclosses)fortheabilityoftheselossfunctionstoresistoverfitting.
For the case of random label flipping, we formally define what can be called
resisting of overfitting or memorization. Using this, we explain why symmetric
lossfunctionscanresistbrute-forcememorizationinthesescenarios.Theanalysis
we present provides some theoretical justification for the empirically observed
performancewithRLL.Wediscusstheimplicationsofthisandspeculateonhow
loss functions may be crucial in realizing better learning dynamics.
1.1 Related Work
Memorization in deep networks got a lot of attention recently due to [25] which
showedthatSGD-basedtrainingofneuralnetworksdrivesthetrainingsetaccu-
racy to 100% even in case of randomly labelled data with none of the standard
regularizationmethodsbeinghelpfulforavoidingthismemorization.Theyspec-
ulate on the implications of this for characterizing the generalization abilities of
networks. In further studies, [1,7] characterize the behaviour of neural networks
on real and randomly-labelled data experimentally and find that deep networks
learnsimplerpatternsfirstbeforestartingtomemorizethedata.Theyalsoclaim
that explicit regularization such as dropout can actually help resist memoriza-
tion to some extent. [3] shows that memorization is necessary for generalization
for some types of distributions which has been tested empirically by [4]. How-
ever, none of these studies investigate whether the loss function has a role in
memorization and that is what is explored in this paper
There are many works that attempt comparative study of loss functions
for classification tasks. [9] shows, with extensive empirical experiments on a
variety of data sets, that MSE performs better than CCE thus challenging the
conventional wisdom of the superiority of CCE loss for classification tasks. [2]
argue that CCE is favourable (compared to MSE) for multi-class settings but
propose a technique that makes performance of MSE comparable to that of
CCE.[19,22]findMSEhascomparableorbetterperformancethanhingelossfor
severaltasks.[16]showthatminimizersofriskobtainedincaseofMSEandhinge
loss are the same for overparameterized linear models under certain conditions.
These and other similar works compare different loss functions for classification
and regression tasks from the point of view of generalization whereas our work
looks at the role loss functions can play in affecting the degree of memorization
in overparameterized networks.
The problem of learning under label noise, that is, learning when training
data has random labeling errors, has also been extensively studied in recent
years. (See, e.g., [5,6,15,17,23]). In tackling label noise the focus is mostly
on algorithms that deliver good performance by, e.g., sample reweighting, label
cleaning,losscorrection,etc.Inthisworkourfocusisontheinherentrobustness
of a loss function and not on any algorithmic modifications to take care of label
noise.
Themaincontributionsofthepaperareasfollows:Weconsidersomescenar-
ios of network architectures and randomization of training labels under which
4 Patel, D et al.
deep networks are earlier demonstrated to be susceptible to memorization. We
show through empirical studies that training the same network with a differ-
ent loss function, namely, RLL, can significantly resist this memorization as
compared to training with standard CCE or MSE. Our experiments adequately
demonstratethatthelossfunctionhasacrucialroleandsupportsourviewpoint
that it is important to study such properties of loss functions. We propose a
formal definition for the ability of a network to resist overfitting of the kind
studied [1,25]. Using this definition, for these scenarios of random label flipping
on training data, we provide theoretical justification for the observed perfor-
mance with the symmetric loss functions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present our
empirical studies with the CCE, MSE, & RLL loss functions. Section 3 presents
our theoretical analysis. Conclusions are presented in Section 4.
2 Role of loss function in resisting memorization
Weexperimentwithtwonetworkarchitectures.OneisanInception-likenetwork
architecture (referred to as Inception-Lite in this paper) which is same as that
used in [25] for demonstrating memorization in deep networks. The second is
ResNet-32 (and ResNet-18 for MNIST) architecture as used in [23].
In this section we present results with three loss functions. Two are the
standard loss functions used with neural networks, namely, CCE and MSE, and
the third is a symmetric loss, viz. RLL. Since we are considering classification
problems,forallthenetworksweassumeasoftmaxoutputlayer.Foraninput,x,
let g(x) denote the vector output of the network with components g (x). When
i
x belongs to class k, the label would be the one-hot vector ek where ek =1 and
k
ek = 0, ∀j (cid:54)= k. Let K denote the number of classes. With this notation, the
j
three loss functions can be defined as follows:
(cid:88)
L (g(x),ek)=− ek log(g (x)) =−log(g (x))
CCE i i k
i
L (g(x),ek)= (cid:88)(cid:0) g (x)−ek(cid:1)2
MSE i i
i
(cid:18) (cid:19)
α+1 (cid:88) 1
L (g(x),ek)=log −log(α+g (x))+ log(α+g (x))
RLL α k K−1 j
j(cid:54)=k
where α>0 is a parameter of the RLL.
WecangetsomeinsightsonbehaviourofRLLversusCCEasfollows:Whenx
isinclass-k,g (x)istheposteriorprobabilityassignedtoclass-kbythenetwork.
k
Ifthisishigh,thentheCCEloss,whichis−log(g (x),islow.However,theCCE
k
lossisunboundedbecause,inprinciple,g (x)canbearbitrarilysmall.Disregard-
k
ingtheconstantterm,theRLLtakes−log(α+g (x))+ (cid:80) 1 log(α+g (x))
k j(cid:54)=k K−1 j
as its value. Since we are using log(α+g (x)) rather than log(g (x)), the loss
j j
is now bounded. More importantly, the loss is essentially determined through a
Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does the Loss Function matter? 5
kind of comparison of the posterior probability assigned to class-k by the net-
workagainsttheaverageprobabilityassignedtoallotherclasses.(Theconstant
term in RLL is there only to ensure that the loss is non-negative). As we shall
see, this gives some amount of robustness in the risk minimization resulting in
RLL exhibiting good resistance to memorization.
We train all the networks to minimize empirical risk (with each of the loss
functions). We employ mini-batch based stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for
Inception-Lite & ResNet-32 (for CIFAR-10) and Adam [10] for ResNet-18 (for
MNIST). For Inception-Lite, we use a constant step-size of 0.01 in each epoch
which is reduced by a factor of 0.95 after each epoch for 100 epochs whereas a
constantstep-sizeof0.1isusedforResNet-32whichisreducedbyafactorof0.1
after 100 and 150 epochs. ResNet-32 & ResNet-18 are trained for 200 epochs.
The ResNet-18 is trained with a step-size of 0.001. Inception-Lite is trained for
100 epochs because the training accuracies saturate by then. Inception-Lite and
ResNet-18 are trained without weight decay whereas ResNet-32 is trained with
a weight decay of 0.0001.
CIFAR-10andMNISTbenchmarkdatasetsareusedfortheexperiments.As
explainedearlier,westudythememorizationbythenetworksthroughrandomly
altering the class labels in the training set. For this, independently for each
example,weretaintheoriginallabelwithprobability(1−η)andchangeitwith
probabilityη.Whenthelabelischanged,itischangedtooneoftheotherclasses
with equal probability. We experiment with η = 0,0.2,0.4, and 0.6. (Note that
η = 0 corresponds to the clean or original training data). By varying η we can
changetheamountofpatterninformationpresentintrainingdataandhencecan
study whether a loss function can result in learning this information. Here, we
are considering 10-class classification task. Our randomization of labels is such
that up to η <0.9, in an expectation sense, for any class-j, the number of data
points in the training set that are correctly labelled as class-j would be more
thanthenumberofdatapointsofaclass-i,i(cid:54)=j,incorrectlylabelledasclass-j.
Hence, at η well below 0.9 there should be scope for learning the underlying
patterns and not overfitting the randomized training data.
(a) CCE (b) MSE (c) CCE (d) MSE
Fig.1:TrainingsetaccuraciesforResNet-32((a)&(b))&Inception-Lite((c)&
(d))trainedonCIFAR-10withCCEandMSElossesforforη ∈{0.,0.2,0.4,0.6}
6 Patel, D et al.
(a) CCE (b) MSE
Fig.2: Training set accuracies for ResNet-18 trained on MNIST with CCE and
MSE losses for different levels of label noise
(a) ResNet−32 (b) ResNet−18 (c) Inception−Lite
Fig.3: Training set accuracies for networks trained on CIFAR-10 ((a) & (c)) &
MNIST ((b)) with RLL for η ∈{0.,0.2,0.4,0.6}
Figure 1 shows the training accuracies achieved with ResNet-32 and Incep-
tionLite when we train the network with CCE & MSE for various values of η on
CIFAR-10whileFigure2showstrainingaccuraciesofResNet-18withCCEand
MSEforMNIST.Ascanbeseenfromthefigures,forallvaluesofη thetraining
errorgoesdownclosetozerothoughittakesafewepochsmorewithhigherval-
uesofη.TheonlyexceptioniswhenResNet-18istrainedonMNISTwithMSE;
butevenherethetrainingaccuracyreachesahighvalue.Thisisconsistentwith
theresultsreportedin[1,25].(Notethat[25]showtrainingsetperformancesonly
for η =1 and do not experiment with varying levels of noise as was done here.)
Note that at η = 0.2, 80% of training samples of a class are correctly labelled
and hence would contain the patterns that the network would have learnt when
trained with clean data. However, the network ends up learning a function that
can exactly reproduce the training set labels. This seems to indicate that with
these loss functions the topography of the empirical risk function is such that
the learning dynamics takes the network to a point that fits the random labels
Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does the Loss Function matter? 7
exactly. The brute-force memorization manifests itself in these networks trained
with CCE even at moderate levels of label randomization.
These results may be contrasted with those presented in Figure 3 which are
obtained when the same networks are trained with RLL for different values of
η on MNIST & CIFAR-10. As can be seen from the figures, the training set
accuracy achieved by RLL for non-zero values of η is always well below that
achieved on clean data. This shows that the network does not blindly learn to
reproducethetrainingsetlabels.Thisissignificantbecausethisshowsthatwhen
we keep everything else same and change only the loss function, the learning
dynamics now seem to be able to resist brute-force memorization. Also, for
η = 0.2 and η = 0.4 the difference in training-accuracy on clean and noisy
data is almost equal to the noise-rate thus suggesting that this loss function
seems to be able to disregard data that are wrongly labelled.
We now take a closer look to understand the kind of classifier learnt by
RLL under noisy data. Let {X ,y }(cid:96) denote the original training data and
i i i=1
let {X ,y˜}(cid:96) denote the noisy or randomly-labelled data given to the learning
i i i=1
algorithm. Let h(X) denote the actual class label predicted by the network for
X (which is determined by max(g (X)) where g(X) is the output of softmax
i
layer). Then the training accuracy, say J , is defined by
1
(cid:96)
1(cid:88)
J = I
1 (cid:96) [h(Xi)=y˜i)]
i=1
whereI isindicatorofA.Thisistheaccuracydefinedwithrespecttothelabels
A
as given in the training set. We define another accuracy, J , by
2
(cid:96)
1(cid:88)
J = I
2 (cid:96) [h(Xi)=yi)]
i=1
J is the accuracy with respect to original, uncorrupted training set. This ac-
2
curacy indicates how well the network, learned with randomly-altered labels,
would be able to reproduce the original clean labels of the training data.
WeshowinFigures4theaccuraciesJ andJ fornetworkslearnedwiththe
1 2
differentlossfunctionsfordifferentvaluesofη.AscanbeseenfromFigures4a&
4cfornetworkstrainedwithCCEandMSElosses,theJ accuracy(dashedline)
2
is always well below the J accuracy (solid line). This is as expected because,
1
as seen earlier, the training accuracy, which is equal to J , is close to 100%.
1
However, for networks learned with RLL (Figure 4b & 4d), it is the J (dashed
2
line) accuracy that is always higher than the J accuracy (solid line). As a
1
matter of fact, for η = 0.2,0.4, the J accuracy of the networks learned using
2
RLL is close to the training accuracy achieved with clean data. This suggests
that this loss function is able to disregard the randomly altered labels and help
the network learn a classifier that it would have learned with clean data.
There is another interesting point about this figure. The figure shows how
theJ andJ accuraciesevolvewithepochs.Ascanbeseenfromthefigure,the
1 2
networks learned using CCE with noisy data seemed to have initially tried to
8 Patel, D et al.
(a) CCE (b) RLL (c) MSE (d) RLL
Fig.4: J and J accuracies for Inception-Lite ((a) & (b)) & ResNet-18 ((c) &
1 2
(d))trainedonCIFAR-10andMNISTresp.forη ∈{0.,0.2,0.4,0.6}(Solidlines
show J accuracy; dashed lines show J accuracy)
1 2
(a) Norm.MSE (b) Norm.MSE (c) Norm.MSE (d) Norm.MSE
Fig.5: Train. accuracy and J & J accuracies for Inception-Lite ((a) & (c))
1 2
& ResNet-18 ((b) & (d)) trained on CIFAR-10 and MNIST resp. for η ∈
{0.,0.2,0.4,0.6} (Solid lines show J accuracy; dashed lines show J accuracy)
1 2
learn the patterns and thus the J accuracy is higher in the early epochs. But
2
eventually the network ‘flips’ and overfits to the random labels in training data.
However, this ‘flip’ never happens for networks trained using RLL; through all
the epochs, the J accuracy stays higher.
2
All the empirical results presented in this section amply demonstrate that
a loss function can play a significant role in mitigating the memorization ef-
fect observed with deep neural networks. In the next section, we present some
theoretical analysis that explains, to some extent, the results presented in this
section.
3 Robustness of Symmetric Loss Functions
In[25],fornetworkslearnedusingtrainingdatawithrandomlabels,theaccuracy
obtained on part of the original data is taken as test error for the purpose of
discussing the generalization abilities. However, this may be somewhat of an
Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does the Loss Function matter? 9
inaccuratenomenclature.Normallythetesterroriserroronnewdatabutdrawn
from the same distribution as that from which training data is drawn.
We will now present another way of formalizing this. For this section we
assume class labels, y , take values in Y = {1,··· ,K} rather than being one-
i
hot vectors. Let S = {X ,y }(cid:96) be the original training data and we assume
i i i=1
it is drawn iid according to a distribution D. The training data with randomly
altered labels is denoted by S ={X ,y˜}(cid:96) , where, for each i,
η i i i=1
(cid:26)
y with probability 1−η
y˜ = i
i j ∈Y −{y } with probability η
i K−1
That is, y˜ is same as y with probability (1−η) and takes each of the other
i i
possiblelabelswithequalprobability.WedenotethedistributionfromwhichS
η
is drawn as D and it is related to D as given above.
η
When one is empirically investigating memorization of random labels, one is
using training data drawn according to distribution D but is interested in test
η
error according to distribution D. Because of the special relationship between
thetwodistributions,weareaskingwhetheritispossibleforthenetworklearned
using data drawn from D to do well on data drawn from D. As a matter of
η
fact, we want it to do well on data only from D; we do not want it to learn
distribution D .
η
Lethandh denotetheclassifierfunction(network)learnedbyanalgorithm
η
whengivenS andS astrainingdata,respectively.Wecansaythatanalgorithm
η
resists memorization if
Prob [h(X)=y]=Prob [h (X)=y]
(X,y)∼D (X,y)∼D η
What this means is that the accuracy on the original data achieved by the
network learnt with noisy data is same as that of network learnt with original
clean data. This is the ideal case where random altering of labels would have
no effect on the classifier learnt. Note that the RHS above is what we called J
2
accuracy in the previous section.
The standard algorithm employed for training all networks is empirical risk
minimization.Theabovepropertycanbeestablishedforriskminimizationifthe
loss function satisfies a special property called symmetry [6].
Definition: A loss function L is called symmetric if it satisfies
K
(cid:88)
L(g(X),j)=C, ∀g,X
j=1
where C is a finite constant. That is, given any network (or function) g and any
input X, if we sum the loss values over all class labels, it should give the same
constant.
Theorem 1 Let L be a symmetric loss, D and Dη be as defined above. As-
sume η < K−1. Let y and y˜ denote the original and noisy label corresponding
K x x
to a pattern X. The risk of h over D and over Dη is R (h) = E [L(h(X),y )]
L D x
10 Patel, D et al.
and Rη(h) = E [L(h(X),y˜ )] respectively. Then, given any two classifiers h
L Dη x 1
and h , if R (h )<R (h ), then Rη(h )<Rη(h ) and vice versa.
2 L 1 L 2 L 1 L 2
Proof (This follows easily from the proof of Theorem 1 in [6].) Given the
way the randomized labels are generated, we have
Rη(h)=E L(h(X),y˜ )
L X,y˜x x
=E E E L(h(X),y˜ )
X yx|X y˜x|X,yx x
 
η (cid:88)
=E
X
E yx|X(1−η)L(h(X),y
x
)+
K−1
L(h(X),i)
i(cid:54)=yx
η
=(1−η)R (h)+ (C−R (h))
L K−1 L
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Cη ηK
= + 1− R (h)
K−1 K−1 L
where C is the constant in the symmetry condition on the loss function and K
is the number of classes. Since η < K−1, we have (1− ηK ) > 0. Hence, the
K K−1
above shows that whenever R (h ) < R (h ), we get Rη(h ) < Rη(h ) and
L 1 L 2 L 1 L 2
vice versa. This completes the proof.
Theorem1showsthatthesymmetriclossmaintainstheriskrankingofdiffer-
ent networks regardless of random flipping of labels (as long as η < K−1). This
K
impliesthatanylocalminimumofriskunderrandomlyflippedlabelswouldalso
bealocalminimumofriskunderoriginallabelsifthelossfunctionissymmetric.
The loss function RLL satisfies the symmetry condition [13]. Thus, if we
are using RLL, then any local minimum of risk under D would also be a local
η
minimumofriskunderD.Eventhoughthisresultisonlyforminimaofrisk,one
can expect local minima of empirical risk under random label flips to be good
approximators of local minima of empirical risk with clean, original samples.
This explains the empirical results presented in the previous section regarding
the ability of RLL to resist memorization.
There are other losses that satisfy the symmetry condition, e.g., 0–1 loss,
mean absolute value of error (MAE), etc.
ItiseasytoverifythatneitherCCEnorMSEsatisfythesymmetrycondition.
Though the symmetry of loss is only a sufficient condition for robustness, this
may provide an explanation of the overfitting observed with these loss functions
when the labels are randomly flipped.
As is easy to see, the symmetry condition implies that the loss function is
bounded. Given a bounded loss function we can satisfy the symmetry condition
by ‘normalizing’ it. Given a bounded loss L, define L¯ by
L(g(X),j)
L¯(g(X),j)=
(cid:80)
L(g(X),s)
s
It is easy to see that L¯ satisfies the symmetry condition. As mentioned ear-
lier, CCE loss is unbounded and hence normalization would not turn it into a
symmetric loss. However, we can normalize MSE loss.
Memorization in Deep Neural Networks: Does the Loss Function matter? 11
In Figure 5 we show results obtained using normalized MSE. Once we nor-
malizeMSE,itnolongerfitsthedatawithrandomlabelsperfectly;thetraining
accuracy now saturates at a value below 100% and thus it behaves more like
RLL now.
The empirical results presented in the previous section adequately demon-
stratethatthelossfunctioncanplayacrucialroleinmitigatingthetendencyof
deep networks to memorize the training examples. The analysis presented here
provides an explanation for this ability of RLL to resist such memorization. As
a mater of fact, if the loss function is symmetric it would have such robustness
and we can normalize a bounded loss to have such robustness.
4 Conclusions
Many recent studies have shown that overparameterized deep networks seem to
becapableofperfectlyfittingevenrandomly-labelleddata.Thisphenomenonof
memorization in deep networks has received a lot of attention because it raises
important questions on how to understand generalization abilities of deep net-
works.Inthispaperwehaveshownthroughempiricalstudiesthatchangingthe
loss function alone can significantly change the memorization in such deep net-
works. We showed this with the symmetric loss functions and we have provided
some theoretical analysis to explain the empirical results. The results presented
here suggest that choice of loss function can play a critical role in overfitting
by deep networks. We feel it is important to further investigate the nature of
different loss functions for a better understanding of generalization abilities of
deep networks.
References
1. Arpit, D., Jastrzebski, S.K., Ballas, N., Krueger, D., Bengio, E., Kanwal, M.S.,
Maharaj, T., Fischer, A., Courville, A.C., Bengio, Y., et al.: A closer look at
memorization in deep networks. In: ICML (2017)
2. Demirkaya,A.,Chen,J.,Oymak,S.:Exploringtheroleoflossfunctionsinmulti-
class classification. In: 2020 54th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and
Systems (CISS). pp. 1–5 (2020)
3. Feldman, V.: Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long tail.
In:Proceedingsofthe52ndAnnualACMSIGACTSymposiumonTheoryofCom-
puting. pp. 954–959 (2020)
4. Feldman, V., Zhang, C.: What neural networks memorize and why: Discovering
the long tail via influence estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33 (2020)
5. Frenay, B., Verleysen, M.: Classification in the presence of label noise: A sur-
vey.IEEETransactionsonNeuralNetworksandLearningSystems25(5),845–869
(2014)
6. Ghosh,A.,Kumar,H.,Sastry,P.:Robustlossfunctionsunderlabelnoisefordeep
neuralnetworks.In:ProceedingsoftheThirty-FirstAAAIConferenceonArtificial
Intelligence. pp. 1919–1925 (2017)
12 Patel, D et al.
7. Gu, J., Tresp, V.: Neural network memorization dissection (2019)
8. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., White, H., et al.: Multilayer feedforward networks
are universal approximators. Neural networks 2(5), 359–366 (1989)
9. Hui, L., Belkin, M.: Evaluation of neural architectures trained with square loss vs
cross-entropy in classification tasks (2020)
10. Kingma,D.P.,Ba,J.:Adam:Amethodforstochasticoptimization.arXivpreprint
arXiv:1412.6980 (2014)
11. Krizhevsky, A.: Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Toronto (2009)
12. Krizhevsky,A.,Sutskever,I.,Hinton,G.E.:Imagenetclassificationwithdeepcon-
volutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM 60(6), 84–90 (2017)
13. Kumar, H., Sastry, P.S.: Robust loss functions for learning multi-class classifiers.
In:2018IEEEInternationalConferenceonSystems,Man,andCybernetics(SMC).
pp. 687–692 (2018)
14. LeCun,Y.,Bottou,L.,Bengio,Y.,Haffner,P.:Gradient-basedlearningappliedto
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 86(11), 2278–2324 (1998)
15. Manwani, N., Sastry, P.S.: Noise tolerance under risk minimization. IEEE Trans-
actions on Cybernetics 43(3), 1146–1151 (2013)
16. Muthukumar, V., Narang, A., Subramanian, V., Belkin, M., Hsu, D., Sahai, A.:
Classification vs regression in overparameterized regimes: Does the loss function
matter? (2020)
17. Patrini, G., Rozza, A., Krishna Menon, A., Nock, R., Qu, L.: Making deep neural
networks robust to label noise: A loss correction approach. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (July
2017)
18. Peters, M.E., Neumann, M., Iyyer, M., Gardner, M., Clark, C., Lee, K., Zettle-
moyer, L.: Deep contextualized word representations. In: Proc. of NAACL (2018)
19. Que, Q., Belkin, M.: Back to the future: Radial basis function networks revis-
ited.In:Proceedingsofthe19thInternationalConferenceonArtificialIntelligence
andStatistics.ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearch,vol.51,pp.1375–1383.
PMLR, Cadiz, Spain (09–11 May 2016)
20. Raffel,C.,Shazeer,N.,Roberts,A.,Lee,K.,Narang,S.,Matena,M.,Zhou,Y.,Li,
W., Liu, P.J.: Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21(140), 1–67 (2020)
21. Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., Farhadi, A.: You only look once: Unified,
real-time object detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. pp. 779–788 (2016)
22. Rifkin,R.M.:Everythingoldisnewagain:afreshlookathistoricalapproachesin
machine learning. Ph.D. thesis, Massachussets Insitute of Technology (2002)
23. Shu, J., Xie, Q., Yi, L., Zhao, Q., Zhou, S., Xu, Z., Meng, D.: Meta-weight-net:
Learning an explicit mapping for sample weighting. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. pp. 1919–1930 (2019)
24. Wang,W.,Bi,B.,Yan,M.,Wu,C.,Bao,Z.,Xia,J.,Peng,L.,Si,L.:StructBERT:
Incorporatinglanguagestructuresintopre-trainingfordeeplanguageunderstand-
ing (2019)
25. Zhang, C., Bengio, S., Hardt, M., Recht, B., Vinyals, O.: Understanding deep
learning requires rethinking generalization (2017)
