Monodense Deep Neural Model for Determining
Item Price Elasticity
Lakshya Garg Sai Yaswanth Deep Narayan Mishra Karthik Kumaran
Walmart Inc. Walmart Inc. Walmart Inc. Walmart Inc.
Hoboken,NJ, USA Seattle,WA, USA Sunnyvale,CA, USA Sunnyvale,CA, USA
lakshya.garg@walmart.com sai.yaswanth@walmart.com deep.mishra@walmart.com karthik.kumaran@walmart.com
Anupriya Sharma Mayank Uniyal
Walmart Inc. Walmart Inc.
Sunnyvale,CA, USA Bangalore, KA, IND
anupriya.sharma0@walmart.com mayank.uniyal@walmart.com
Abstract—Item Price Elasticity is used to quantify the re- and design effective promotional campaigns. Industries such
sponsiveness of consumer demand to changes in item prices, as retail, e-commerce, and consumer goods heavily rely on
enabling businesses to create pricing strategies and optimize
elasticity insights to understand how customers respond to
revenue management. Sectors such as store retail, e-commerce,
price variations across different product, categories, and de-
and consumer goods rely on elasticity information derived from
historical sales and pricing data. This elasticity provides an partments.
understanding of purchasing behavior across different items, Traditionalapproachestoelasticityestimation,suchasecono-
consumer discount sensitivity, and demand elastic departments. metric models, often assume linear or exponential relation-
Thisinformationisparticularlyvaluableforcompetitivemarkets
ships between demand and price and fail to capture com-
andresource-constrainedbusinessesdecisionmakingwhichaims
plex, non-linear, and non exponential patterns. These methods
to maximize profitability and market share. Price elasticity also
uncovers historical shifts in consumer responsiveness over time. also typically overlook contextual factors such as seasonality,
Inthispaper,wemodelitem-levelpriceelasticityusinglarge-scale substitute-item interactions, competitor pricing, and dynamic
transactional datasets, by proposing a novel elasticity estimation shifts in demand, which are increasingly important in today’s
framework which has the capability to work in an absence
competitive and data-rich environments. Moreover these tra-
of treatment control setting. We test this framework by using
ditional econometric approaches fail to scale across millions
Machine learning based algorithms listed below, including our
newly proposed Monodense deep neural network. of items due to price and business constraints of running
1) Monodense-DLnetwork–Hybridneuralnetworkarchitec- control/treatment (C/T) experiments across the whole item
ture combining embedding, dense, and Monodense layers universe. For retailers with millions of items sold across
2) DML – Double machine learning setting using regression thousands of stores, conducting experiments for every item-
models
store combination is financially infeasible. Additionally, the
3) LGBM – Light Gradient Boosting Model
commitment to providing consistent lowest prices within each
We evaluate our model on multi-category retail data spanning
millions of transactions using a back testing framework. Ex- channelcreatesafundamentalchallenge:offeringtwodifferent
perimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed prices for the same item in the same store simultaneously
neural network model within the framework compared to other undermines the experimental design required for C/T testing.
prevalent ML based methods listed above.
This dual challenge—catalog scalability and single-price-per-
Index Terms—Price Elasticity, Feedforward Networks, Mono-
channel constraints—affects not only large-scale retailers but
tonicity Constraints, Deep Learning, Demand Forecasting.
also small independent retailers operating even a single loca-
I. INTRODUCTION tion.
Priceelasticityofdemandmeasuressensitivityofconsumer Recent advancements in machine learning (ML) and deep
demand to changes in item prices. To make economic and learning (DL) offer promising alternatives to conventional
business sense this elasticity of demand measure will be models by leveraging large-scale transactional data and un-
always negative. covering intricate patterns in demand responsiveness. In this
% change in quantity demanded work, we propose the following:
E = (1)
d % change in price
1) A novel framework to model item elasticity by using
Accurate estimation of this plays a critical role in enabling
utilizing the rich transactional data that is universally
businesses to optimize pricing strategies, forecast revenue,
available to any retailer.
2) Innovative deep learning model (DLM) that can be
Correspondingauthor:lakshya.garg@walmart.com
©2026IEEE. incorporated within the framework to solve the item
6202
raM
13
]GL.sc[
1v16292.3062:viXra
price elasticity problem recognition in complex datasets. Despite these differences,
both approaches currently require the creation of treatment
and control groups or a carefully catered dataset for training
the algorithms—often through randomized experiments or by
creating two datasets capturing demand of the same item at
two different price points. As demonstrated by Hua et al.,
2021 [1], where the same item was listed on two different
marketplaces at different prices.
Fig.1. Proposedframework
A. Econometric based methods
Asseeninfigure1westartbydatacreation,creatingacross
Houthakker et al., 1970 [2] pioneered the use of demand
joindatasetoftheaggregatedmonthlytransactioninformation
system models to estimate price elasticity of consumer goods,
therebycreatingalagmonthandaleadmonthcombinationfor
employing linear expenditure systems grounded in utility
each item pair. We track the prices across these lead and lag
theory. Subsequent studies, such as Deaton et al., 1980 [3],
month combination along with multiple other signals across
introduced the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS), which
boththeleadandlagmonthssuchasiteminventory,substitute
allowed flexible substitution patterns and provided robust
item availability, item out of stock (OOS) days, item rating
elasticity estimates across multiple commodity groups. These
count, days launched, competitor price, and etc. Once we
models typically relied on household survey data and aggre-
create this information rich feature set we pass it to through
gateconsumptionstatistics,applyingmaximumlikelihoodand
our proposed DLM to predict the items demand in the lead
generalized least squares techniques for elasticity estimation.
month wrt to the items price in the lead month. Finally we
Similarly, Hausman et al., 1996 [4] utilized instrumental vari-
use the DLM to evaluate demand at different prices to get
able approaches to address endogeneity in price and quantity
item elasticities (refer equation 3). Our proposed framework
data,improvingthereliabilityofelasticityestimatesindiscrete
has the following advantages as compared to the traditional
choice frameworks. Traditional econometric methods have
econometric methods and current ML based methods being
thus formed the foundation for empirical demand analysis,
used to solve price elasticity.
emphasizing functional form assumptions and statistical con-
1) Scalable across millions of items at minimal price to sistency in elasticity measurement.
company. It should be noted that most econometric approaches, such as
2) No requirement for a creation C/T group or the need to the Linear Expenditure System or the Almost Ideal Demand
run recurrent expensive experiments. System (AIDS), assume a specific mathematical relationship
3) Our modeling approach ensures the economic relation- between price, quantity, and income (e.g., linear or log-linear
ship between price and demand is intact where as a forms). If the true demand relationship deviates from these
decrease in price should resultin an increase in demand assumptions, which is often the case in real life demand
andviceversa.Thereforethemodelimposesmonotonic- scenarios,theelasticityestimatescanbebiasedormisleading.
ity between demand and price.
B. Machine-learning based methods
Our paper consist of the following sections: In section-II
we review the relevant methods present to solve the problem Zhang et al., 2023 [5] explored gradient boosting frame-
of item elasticity, focusing on econometric and ML methods. works for estimating price elasticity in retail demand fore-
In section-III, we present the proposed framework, including casting, leveraging tree-based ensembles to capture nonlin-
the network architecture, training details, data creation, and ear relationships between price and quantity. A feature-rich
elasticity evaluation. In section-IV we showcase our results approach was adopted, incorporating historical sales, promo-
and findings henceforth followed by a conclusion in section- tional indicators, and seasonality effects to improve predictive
V. accuracy. More recently, Safonov et al., 2024 [6] utilized
deep neural networks to model consumer price responses,
II. RELATEDWORK
employing feed-forward architectures trained on simulated
The literature on price elasticity estimation can be broadly transactional data. These models were fine-tuned using regu-
classifiedintotwocategories:econometric-basedandmachine- larization techniques to mitigate overfitting and enhance gen-
learning-based methods. eralization. Similarly, Gupta et al., 2020 [7] applied recurrent
Theeconometricapproach(e.g.,traditionalregressionmodels, neural networks (RNNs) and attention mechanisms to airline
instrumental variable techniques) focuses on estimating elas- pricing environments, enabling elasticity estimation under
ticity using statistical models grounded in economic theory, temporal dependencies and demand shocks. Unlike traditional
whereas the machine-learning approach (e.g., gradient boost- econometric models, these machine learning approaches do
ing, neural networks) leverages predictive algorithms to infer not impose restrictive functional form assumptions and can
elasticity from observed transaction data. Econometric meth- scale effectively to high-dimensional datasets, making them
odstypicallyrelyonparametricassumptionsandinterpretabil- suitable for personalized pricing and real-time optimization,
ity,whileML-basedmethodsemphasizeflexibilityandpattern however as often seen in real world transactional data, price
and demand fail to uphold a monotonic relationship, wherein be negative. Therefore the acceptable range of month
a decrease in item price does not result in increase of demand difference between lead and lag month is between 1 to
andviceversa.Astheprice–demandrelationshipisoftennon- 12.
monotonicacrossmosttraininginstances,themodelfrequently 2) We only consider those combinations as valid where
infers positive item elasticity values. This non monotonic item inventory is greater than zero in both lead and lag
relationship between price and demand usually happens due months.
to seasonal demand variations, or consumer preferences for
certain products. Our proposed Monodense DLM ensures B. Proposed Monodense-DLM network
that the final evaluated item elasticities are always negative,
Creation of data is the first step in our framework. Post
thereby making them economically consistent, as it bakes in
creating the data we pass the lead lag month combination
the monotonicity between price and demand while modeling
pair data to our proposed DLM. Our neural network
the demand to price relationship.
architecture is designed for demand prediction at different
III. FRAMEWORK prices and incorporates both product and item embedding
layers alongside dense layers to capture complex feature
In the following section we go over our proposed Frame-
interactions.Themainpurposeistoenablethemodeltolearn
work.
the following mathematical relationship D = f(P ,X ,S )
i i i i
A. Dataset creation where D represents the units sold for the item in the lead
i
month, P denotes the price of the item in the lead month,
As discussed earlier post creating a cross join dataset of i
X represents the item, seasonal, and environment variables,
themonthlytransactioninformationwebringinthefollowing i
and S represents price change percentage between lead and
additional information for each lead and lag month. i
lag months.
1) Inventory data to account for stock-outs and availability
The model (figure 3) starts with an encoder like structure
constraints, ensuring elasticity estimates reflected true
where each input depending on whether its a categorical
consumer behavior rather than supply limitations.
or a continuous variable is passed through an embedding
2) Item attribute information, including brand, size, and
or a feed forward dense layer. Each embedding layer is
category, subcategory to model heterogeneity across
followed by a flatten layer, and each dense layer is followed
products and identify cross-category effects.
by a Relu activation. Post learning the higher dimensions
3) Seasonal event data, such as holidays and promotional
of the input features the embedding and continuous feature
periods, to adjust for temporal demand fluctuations and
outputs are further concatenated together and passed through
isolate price-driven changes.
multiple dense layers to further learn higher dimension
4) Competitor item pricing and Item substitute to capture
feature interactions. We saw in our experiments when price
market dynamics and substitution effects
was passed in the top of the proposed model, the models
The data creation is done using pyspark which leverages
sensitivity towards the price was being lost, thereby to make
spark distributed computing. 2 years and 3 month of data
the model more price sensitive we introduced the item price
is considered while creating the training dataset. Our model
at the lower layers of the model through monodense layer.
is trained on 2 years worth of data (80% used in training
This monodense layer ensures that in the learned price to
and 20% as validation set) and the 3 months of data is kept
demand relationship a decrease in price results in an increase
as a out of time test set which is subsequently used to test
in demand and vice versa.
model performance metrics such as WMAPE. Figure 2 shows
an example snapshot of how our final data looks like.
For our implementation of the monodense layer we follow
the work proposed by Davor et al., 2023 [8]
• We apply weight constraints based on a monotonicity
indicator vector t, where each element t corresponds to
i
a feature x .
i
– If t = 1 The feature is considered to be monoton-
i
ically increasing so an increase in input X would
Fig.2. Forsimplicitysomefeaturesarenotshown result an increase in output Y . The corresponding
weights (w ) are constrained to be non-negative
i
Figure 2 shows only one cross join combination where (w ≥0).
i
lag month is one. In the final training set we have multiple – If t = −1: The feature is considered to be mono-
i
combinations where lag month can be 1,2,3,4,...12 and lead tonicallydecreasingsoanincreaseininputXwould
monthsstartsfrom1,2,3,4,5...12andsoon.Westrictlyensure result a decrease in output Y. The corresponding
the below constraints while creating the cross join data. weights (w ) are constrained to be non-positive
i
1) The year month difference between lead and lag year (w ≤0).Thisisimplementedbytakingthenegative
i
months cannot exceed more than 12 months and cannot of a non-negative weight.
– Ift =0:Thefeaturehasno monotonic constraint. 3) Toenhancepricesensitivity,thepriceinputisintroduced
i
The corresponding weights (w ) are not constrained atthelowerlayersofthenetwork,allowinghigherprice
i
and can be positive, negative, or zero. sensitivityofthemodelandimprovingresponsivenessto
• To correctly capture the both concave and convex nature price changes
of demand to price relationship as proposed by Davor et
C. Training Details
al.,2023[8]westartwithazero-centered,monotonically
For training the model, the mean squared error (MSE) loss
increasing, convex activation function (ρ) (e.g., ReLU,
function is used. This loss minimizes the error between the
ELU, SELU). Then Construct two additional monotonic
model-predicted demand for the lead month and the actual
variants:
observed demand in the lead month. Given a continuous
– Concave upper-bounded function:
demandtargety andmodelpredictionyˆ,thelossiscomputed
i i
ρˆ(x)=−ρ(−x) as:
– Bounded function: 1 (cid:88) N (cid:0) (cid:1)2
(cid:40) ρˇ(x+1)−ρˇ(1), if x<0 L MSE = N y i −yˆ i
ρ˜(x)= (2) i=1
ρˆ(x−1)+ρˇ(1), otherwise
where N denotes the number of samples in the batch. The
network outputs a single continuous value per item-instance
Defined piecewise to ensure saturation at its bounds.
yˆ, representing predicted demand. The input consists of a
• Finally we apply these three activations across different fe i ature vector P ,X ,S ∈ RF for each observation i, which
neuron subsets in the monodense layer: i i i
includes price, promotion indicators, inventory signals, com-
– Original convex activation (ρ)
petitor prices, and seasonal features. The network is trained
– Concave activation (ρˆ)
using the Adam optimizer for 25 epochs. A batch size of
– Bounded activation (ρ˜)
128 is used along with a learning rate of 0.01. To stabilize
trainingandimprovegeneralization,inputsarestandardizedto
zeromeanandunitvariance,andL2weightdecayisincluded
in dense layers. Model performance is monitored through
tracking training/validation loss and MSE. For training the
model a GPU with CUDA Core 3840 was used. We tested
our model on 32 Core, 2.10 GHz CPU.
Fig.3. ArchitectureofourproposedDLM
Our DLM network is inherently different from the tra- Fig.4. Modeltrainingandvalidationloss
ditional machine learning/deep learning based methods for
solving price elasticity in the following ways. D. Item elasticity evaluation
1) A key innovation in our architecture is the inclusion Themodelreturnsitemdemandintheprojectedmonthwith
of a monodense layer, which enforces monotonicity of respecttoaninputprice.Therefore,thepriceelasticityforany
price with respect to demand, ensuring economically price change ∆p can be evaluated as:
consistent predictions.
yˆ(p+∆p)−yˆ(p) p
2) Unlike traditional feed-forward models mainly consist E = × (3)
∆p yˆ(p) ∆p
of only dense layers. Our network learns jointly from
both embeddings and dense representations, enabling it Here, ∆p represents the price change that can be submitted
to model for both categorical and continuous attributes by the user or predefined as per business requirements. In
effectively while solve the price elasticity problem. practice, to evaluate elasticity for a future month, we create
our inference set consisting of the most recent lag month data represent lower agreement. It is observed that our proposed
for the item and consider the lead month as lag month+1. model outperforms the other two models in terms of overall
Then, we predict counterfactual demands in the lead month WMAPE.
at two prices p+∆p and p to evaluate elasticity in the lead We are aware that WMAPE is not the only criterion to
month for a price change of ∆p leveraging equation number judge our model as our final goal is to evaluate elasticities
3. so for this we calculate the MAE between a set of items
for which we have a known elasticity referred as ground
IV. RESULTSANDFINDINGS
truth elasticities going forward. MAE measures the deviation
The result evaluation is done through two metrics from these ground truth elasticities and the model evaluated
1) Calculating the actual demand weighted mean absolute elasticities below is the formula for the same.
percentage error (WMAPE) between predicted and ac-
tual demand on the test set. n
1 (cid:88)
2) By calculating the mean absolute error (MAE) between MAE= |e −eˆ|,
n i i
model evaluated elasticities and actual observed elastic- i=1
ities across a sample set of items. where eˆ =predicted elasticity (model evaluated output),
i
The WMAPE is assessed by comparing the ground truth e =actual ground truth elasticity.
i
demand and the model predicted demand across an out of
time test set (OTS). To create this OTS we use last 3 months
Deeplearningmodel LGBM Doublemachinelearning
of the overall data. The model has never been exposed to this
0.36 0.42 0.43
set while training. TABLEII
MAECOMPARISONACROSSMODELS
(cid:80)n
y ·|y −yˆ|
WMAPE= i=1 i i i ×100%,
(cid:80)n
i=1 y i The model having the least MAE is considered to have the
where yˆ =model predicted demand, best elasticities. Ideally a zero MAE would signify that the
i
model predicted elasticities perfectly match the ground truth
y =actual demand.
i
elasticities whereas a higher number would represent lower
A systematic WMAPE comparison of our proposed model agreementbetweenelasticities.Whencomparingourproposed
isdonewithLGBMandadoublemachinelearningregression Monodense DL model with other two models the MAE is
based model. LGBM model consists of multiple gradient lower for our model.
boosting trees with the objective to minimize the gradient
of demand in the lead month. We have leveraged LGBMs V. CONCLUSION
(Guolin et al., 2017 [9]) inbuilt monotonicity indicator to This paper has showcased that it is possible to use deep
impose the monotonicity between demand and price. For neural networks for evaluating item elasticity while making
double machine learning (DML) (Victor et al., 2018 [10]) economically consistent predictions. We successfully evaluate
we have trained a regression based outcome, treatment, and itemelasticityusinganewlyproposedMonodensedeepneural
residual model. As regression models have no inherent way network(DNN)architecture.WebenchmarkMonodenseDNN
of imposing a price to demand monotonic relationship, we model with other prevalent elasticity modeling techniques
do observe some positive item elasticities. Both the models whicharepossibletorunwithinourproposedframeworksuch
were implemented within the same proposed framework and as LGBM and double machine learning methods. The experi-
therefore use the same underlying data distributions. mental results demonstrate that our novel model outperforms
double machine learning and LGBM model. This can be said
Table 1 shows the comparison of all three models using by observing that Monodense DLM achieves a lower overall
the WMAPE evaluation criterion. The model having the least WMAPE and MAE value than the other two models.
demand WMAPE is considered the best. As better demand Paper also demonstrates that with our proposed data creation
prediction will in turn lead to a more reliable elasticity metric methoditispossibletomodelthepriceelasticityusingahuge
because elasticity is evaluated as difference of demands vis a real world transaction dataset (1 billion+ rows) counterpart
vis equation 3. to the other studies conducted in the area which have only
utilized comparatively small or synthetically created datasets.
Deeplearningmodel LGBMmodel DoubleMachineLearning*
We also display that there is no need to artificially impose
30.90% 35.9% 36.1%
TABLEI demand to price monotonic relation in the underlying training
*FORDOUBLEMACHINELEARNINGWMAPEOFOUTCOMEMODELIS data through data filtering or to subset specific items to run
RECORDED
C/T experiment, which might have been following the correct
demand to price relationship. This monotonic relationship can
A zero WMAPE would signify that the model predicted be baked in the DNN model itself.
demandvaluesandactualobserveddemandvaluesatdifferent Asfuturedirectionsofourworkweplantoexperimentwithan
price points are in perfect sync while higher values would evendeepermodelarchitecture,andexperimentwithdifferent
activationfunctionstofurtherbettermodelthedemandtoprice
relationship thereby decreasing our WMAPE and MAE even
further.
REFERENCES
[1] Hua, J., Yan, L., Xu, H., and Yang, C. (2021). Markdowns in
E-CommerceFreshRetail:ACounterfactualPredictionandMulti-Period
Optimization Approach. In *Proceedings of KDD ’21*. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.08313.
[2] Houthakker,H.S.,andTaylor,L.D.(1970).ConsumerDemandinthe
UnitedStates,1929–1970:AnalysesandProjections.HarvardUniversity
Press.
[3] Deaton, A., and Muellbauer, J. (1980). An Almost Ideal Demand
System.*TheAmericanEconomicReview*,70(3),312–326.
[4] Hausman,J.A.(1996).ValuationofNewGoodsunderPerfectandIm-
perfectCompetition.In*TheEconomicsofNewGoods*,pp.207–248.
UniversityofChicagoPress.
[5] Zhang, Y.; Li, H.; Ren, G. (2023). Data-driven exploration of hetero-
geneous gasoline price elasticities using generalized random forests.
*Transportation*, **52**, 215–237. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-
023-10417-w
[6] Safonov, K. (2024). Neural Network Approach to Demand Estimation
andDynamicPricinginRetail.arXivpreprintarXiv:2412.00920.
[7] Gupta,A.,etal.(2020).DeepLearningforAirlinePricingandRevenue
Management: A Recurrent Neural Network Approach with Attention
Mechanisms.In*ProceedingsofINFORMSAnnualMeeting*.
[8] Runje,D.,andShankaranarayana,S.M.(2023).ConstrainedMonotonic
NeuralNetworks.In*Proceedingsofthe40thInternationalConference
onMachineLearning(ICML)*,volume202,pp.29338–29353.PMLR.
[9] Ke,G.,Meng,Q.,Finley,T.,Wang,T.,Chen,W.,Ma,W.,Ye,Q.,and
Liu, T.-Y. (2017). LightGBM: A Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting
DecisionTree.In*Proceedingsofthe31stInternationalConferenceon
NeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS)*,pp.3149–3157.
[10] Chernozhukov,V.,Chetverikov,D.,Demirer,M.,Duflo,E.,Hansen,C.,
Newey,W.,andRobins,J.(2018).Double/debiasedmachinelearningfor
treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics Journal, 21(1),
C1–C68.https://doi.org/10.1111/ectj.12097
