IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 26
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814
Multiple Criteria Decision-Making Preprocessing Using Data
Mining Tools
A. Mosavi
Faculty of Informatics, University of Debrecen
Debrecen 4032 , Hungary
Nonlinear MOO means MCDM dealing with nonlinear
Abstract functions of decision variables. Identification of the
Real-life engineering optimization problems need Multiobjective optimum solution of a nonlinear multiobjective problem
Optimization (MOO) tools. These problems are highly non- and decision-making is often not possible because of the
linear. As the process of Multiple Criteria Decision-Making size of the problem and lack of knowledge about effective
(MCDM) is much expanded most MOO problems in different
variables. [2]
disciplines can be classified on the basis of it. Thus MCDM
Decision-making in the problems related to more than one
methods have gained wide popularity in different sciences and
objective, originating in several disciplines, has been a
applications. Meanwhile the increasing number of involved
challenge to scientists for a long time. They have been
components, variables, parameters, constraints and objectives in
the process, has made the process very complicated. However asked to solve problems with several conflicting objective
the new generation of MOO tools has made the optimization functions. Basically using a single objective optimization
process more automated, but still initializing the process and technology is not sufficient to deal with real-life
setting the initial value of simulation tools and also identifying engineering optimization problems. MOO tools generate
the effective input variables and objectives in order to reach the the solutions which are called Pareto frontier solutions and
smaller design space are still complicated. In this situation
the final decision could be one of these solutions.
adding a preprocessing step into the MCDM procedure could
Generating Pareto frontier solutions and following it
make a huge difference in terms of organizing the input variables
engineering MOO decision-making process has become
according to their effects on the optimization objectives of the
automatic and made easier by utilizing special packages
system. The aim of this paper is to introduce the classification
task of data mining as an effective option for identifying the developed based on different MOO algorithms and
most effective variables of the MCDM systems. To evaluate the techniques such as modeFRONTIER and IOSO families.
effectiveness of the proposed method an example has been given But still the whole process needs improvements as the
for 3D wing design. mentioned packages always have limitations in handling
the large amounts of data such as input variables,
Keywords: Multiple Criteria Decision-Making, constraints, objectives and visualization. However
Multiobjective optimization, preprocessing, Data Mining increasing the number of input variables which is the
characteristic of MCDM engineering systems has made
the process more complicated. The decision-maker setting
1. Introduction
up a new project and making decisions faces a high
amount of variables and objectives. In this regard utilizing
Engineering optimization plays a significant role in
new alternative techniques of data mining in place of
today’s design cycle and decision-making. The
traditional expert-based methods in different areas of
optimization process is essentially seen as system
MCDM including MOO, visualization and decision-
improvement in order to identify and arrange the effective
making appeared to be very popular and supportive in
variables. Problems with multiple objectives and in
dealing with engineering optimization problems which
multiple disciplines are known as Multiobjective
have left lots of room for researches.
optimization decision-making or MCDM problems.
However, many real-life phenomena have a nonlinear
nature. Therefore nonlinear tools for handling several
objectives are needed. In this situation nonlinear MOO 2. Applications of Data Mining in MCDM
deliver an extensive, self-contained approach. [2] process
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 27
www.IJCSI.org
MCDM consists of two parts, MOO and Multiple Criteria et al. [27] utilizes the clustering technique of data mining
Decision Analysis (MCDA). The involved data set in both for visualizing the four objectives of optimization in a
MCDM branches are likely to be huge and complex. self-organizing map. Without the aid of data mining the
Large-scale data of MCDM problems can only be handled visualization of the huge amounts of data in MOO is
with the aid of computers. The field of knowledge extremely difficult. For instance dealing with the
discovery, or data mining, has evolved in the recent past to computational complexity of heatmap-based MOO
address the problem of automatic analysis of larger visualization in [29] is completely dependent on the
amounts of data. However, processing commands may clustering method.
need to be entered manually by data analysts and data
mining results can be fully used by decision makers only 2.3 Decision-Making and Data Mining
when the results are understood explicitly.
Different tasks of data mining including description, Decision making is a post-processing tool which helps the
estimation, prediction, classification, clustering and, user to make selection of the best designs from a family of
association have been utilized in different applications of Pareto solutions. Fig. 2 shows the process of decision
MCDM [13, 24, 25, 22, 23]. making where a decision maker selects one course of
Data reduction is an essential purpose in the data mining action from many possibilities.
process. Data reduction is developed to fulfill objectives
such as improving accuracy of models, scaling the data
mining models, reducing computational cost, and
providing a better understanding of data. The aim of data
reduction is to find a subset of attributes which represent
the concept of data without losing important information.
Data mining techniques in the applications of MCDM are
applicable to the data sets which are needed to be analyzed
Fig.1 Pareto-optimal solutions and decision-making
before the MOO process as a preprocessing sequence and
also to the Pareto fronts solutions and contributions of
The MOO approach attempts to find the Pareto solutions
design variables in decision-making process. Hence the
set, although the decision-making procedures are also very
applications of data mining in MCDM could be separately
important to choose one particular solution from the
studied in three different parts of MOO, decision-Making
Pareto solutions set for implementation in MCDM
and visualization. In the next three sessions these
process.
applications are reviewed.
In dealing with MCDM problems, the final obtained
solution must be as close to the true optimal solution as
2.1 MOO and Data Mining possible and that solution must satisfy the supplied
preference information. In dealing with such a task, input
Large quantities of approaches have been developed for data to MCDM such as initial value of variables is
solving nonlinear MOO problems. A classification of extremely important. An additional difficulty is the fact
these methods has been suggested in [31].In some of these that the decision maker or optimizer is not necessarily an
methods the data mining tools have been applied in order expert in the field of the decision making process so as to
to make the process easier, minimize the computational be able to correctly identify effective and valuable
cost, etc. for instance Zitzler et al. [22] have integrated variables. Hence, getting help for analyzing the input
different MOO techniques and applied the clustering task variables and decision-making variables from an
of data mining called “average linkage method” [23] to intelligent computational system seems to be necessary.
maintain diversity. For instance Katharina et al [13] utilized a data mining
tool for supporting the process of decision making. In
2.2 Visualization and Data Mining MCDM, Satisfying Trade-Off Method (STOM) is a tool
for dealing with decision making problems. Nakayama
Graphs and plots are usually applied for understanding [24, 25] in some multiobjective STOM problems utilizes
maximum three-dimensional relationships achieved the classification task of data mining to satisfy the decision
between MOO objectives. But for visualization the making procedure.
multiple objective problems data mining tasks have to be
applied. In this regard Classifications and Clustering [26, 3. Meta-modeling Based Multiobjective
27] are the most useful tasks. Common data mining Optimization Tasks
methods utilized for classification are the k-nearest
neighbor decision tree, and neural network [28]. Obayashi
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 28
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814
Meta-modeling or surrogate modeling tasks are applied in problem is not clear in terms of input variables. The
order to model the design space on the basis of the limited proposed method of this paper tries to find the variables
number of numerical analyses. Meta-modeling based which have greater effects on objective functions. This
MOO tasks have wide application in engineering MCDM would support the MCDM processes in uncertain sampled
problems. In these problems there are several sources of records in order to estimate the whole design space.
complexity, such as the computational difficulties in The approach is to mine the problem's data set including
modeling, and the high number of variables, objectives input variables and their effects on objectives. It is
and constraints. Besides, the coupling process of different supposed to help with gaining a better understanding of
disciplines is a challenging job. For reasons of simulation, the design space.
there are software packages which are integrated into the
workflow. A Limited number of simulations could be run
in the limited period of time. In this situation Meta- 4. The Effects of Large Amounts of Input
modeling based tasks of MOO are utilized for obtaining Variables on MOO Tasks; Research
maximum information from a minimum number of Motivation
simulations. Fig. 1 shows the general workflow of Meta-
modeling based MOO. On one hand increasing the number of input variables in a
MOO problem by applying the Meta-modeling tools
would increase the accuracy of the results. On the other
Variables& Computer
hand it can also cause computational difficulty and makes
Objectives Simulations Meta-modeling
tasks Visualizatio the process very complicated. Identifying the input
n variables of a design optimization problem is a manual
step of initializing the optimization workflow. This step is
usually done by an engineer and he is responsible for
New sets of variable
configuration Decision- adding or ignoring certain variables based on his
Making understanding of the system. In the sections below the
difficulties of dealing with a large amount of input
Fig.2 General workflow of Meta-modeling based MOO variables in Meta-modeling based MOO tasks are
reviewed. Dealing with these difficulties has motivated
In this workflow the variables are identified and initialized
this research.
at the first step. Then they pass directly to the next steps of
numerical analysis and MOO. Therefore, there is not any
4.1 DOE
control and monitoring of the input variables.
"Compressor blade optimization" by Xinwei et al. [3] is an
DOE explores the design space and automatically chooses
example of this workflow.
the minimum set of solutions which contain the maximum
For dealing with MCDM problems in order to obtain the
amount of information. This ability helps to achieve
Pareto frontier solutions and, following it, the decision-
smaller design space. Each single numerical analysis takes
making process, one or more of the Meta-modeling tasks
a long time and some simulations are very expensive to
below have been utilized depending on the characteristics
run for more than a limited number of calculations. In this
of the problem.
regard DOE delivers enough initial calculations which
 Design of Experiments (DOE)
allow the optimization process to learn the behavior of
 Genetic algorithms(GA)
design parameters. DOE mostly deals with the value of
 Response Surface modeling(RSM)
variables, variable variations and the properties of the
 Hybrid system governing parameters. However ranking, organizing and
 Indirect Optimization on the basis of Self- removing the less important variables as a supporting
Organization (IOSO) process, before setting up the DOE projects, could be very
useful in reducing the design space and computational
3.1 Modeling; State of the Problem costs.
In business systems engineering, Vergidis et al. in
Before any optimization can be done, the problem must be “Optimization of business process designs” [9] and Laszlo
modeled first. In this regard identifying all dimensions of et al. in the field of management and resolution in
the problem such as formulation of the optimization “resource allocation under uncertainty” [10] use DOE
problem with specifying input variables, decision tools for MOO. In their analyzing processes or other
variables, objectives, constraints, and variable bounds is related approaches experiments have been used to evaluate
an important task [19]. However in some cases the which inputs have more impact on the outputs, and what
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 29
www.IJCSI.org
the target level of tested inputs might achieve on a desired automated preprocessing tool needs to be applied to
output. However in large design space where lots of input identify the most important variables out of thousands
variables are involved having experiments in all design possible variables which have more effects on
space results in excessive computational costs. In this optimization objectives.
situation data mining classification techniques can reduce
the computational costs as it could deliver useful 4.3 Response Surface
information about those parts of design space where there
is not a great deal of experimental data available. In both In cases where running a full optimization is not practical
the above mentioned approaches input variables are in virtual optimizations have become effective by utilizing
high number which may not have any effect on system the response surface tools. There is lots of theoretical and
behavior but still were included in the workflow. This fact practical literature available in this regard [7, 19]. In
has increased the computation time of DOE. Classification RSM-based MOO creating the Meta-models based solely
of the input data sets of the DOE process could deliver on the most important variables rather than all variables,
more information about design space to minimize the leads to more accurate models of estimation.
computational costs.
4.4 Hybrid systems
4.2 GA-based MOO
Different tasks of Meta-modeling MOO are combined to
GA is very important in the developing of optimization obtain some hybrid methods. A hybrid method tries to
techniques. The GA tools work with random variables. exploit the specific advantages of different approaches by
The GA-based algorithm searches the design space combining more than one together. Hybrid methods are a
according to the different variable configurations while combination of important group of methods that have
utilizing an objective or fitness function. GA approaches significantly contributed to the renewal of MOO process.
have been widely utilized for shape optimization such as For example, the modeFRONTIER package has combined
the application presented by Arularasan et al [11]. In most the robustness of the GA with the accuracy of gradient-
of the GA applications in multiobjective shape based methods. But still these packages need some support
optimization problems there are more than fifty design in order to make the design space as small as possible.
variables involved, including the variation of constraints. The preprocessing of input values could make a huge
It has been observed that such processes involve dealing difference in terms of computational costs. Hybrid-based
with a huge amount of data. As a result minimizing the tools and packages are very powerful for dealing with
number of variables in the GA-based shape optimization MOO problems. In the field of intelligent design and
process, even in the same amount of constraints, could manufacturing systems, Olcer in “A hybrid approach for
make the optimization design space smaller and therefore multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems in
dramatically decrease the computational cost. Zhong et al. ship design" [10] utilized hybrid tools. In his approach it
in “Robust Airfoil Optimization” [4] and András et al. “in seems that ranking the input variables based on their
Aerodynamic optimization” [5] utilized genetic algorithm- effects on the design objectives before utilizing any kind
based methods for aerodynamic Multiobjective shape of Hybrid-based approaches could be very efficient.
optimization. In their study managing the number of input
variables is introduced as an issue. Hence, it is assumed 4.5 Indirect Optimization on the basis of Self-
that removing the less effective variables from the GA-
Organization (IOSO)
based design space and searching with a minimum number
of variables to find the optimal solutions, will make the
IOSO technology is based on the response surface
process less complicated.
technology. Its technique is totally different from the
In the other fields such as power systems and modeling of
current approaches to optimization. The applied strategy
economic process; Li in “Study of multi-objective
has higher efficiency and provides wider range of
optimization and multi-attribute decision-making” [8]
capabilities than standard algorithms. The main advantage
utilizes genetic algorithm tools in the field of marine
of IOSO technology is ability to solve very complex
systems with an emphasis on safety issues and Alan et al.
optimization tasks. It can approximate objective functions
in “Optimization of crashworthy marine structures” [7]
with complex topology using minimal number of points in
has applied GA and response surface tools together for
the experiment plan, particularly including the case when
optimization. In above mentioned examples of large scale
the number of points is less than the number of design
applications the GA faces a huge number of variable
variables [30, 21]. However because of the limitation of
configurations, which is an expensive computation
the package in accepting a limited number of input
process. In dealing with such large scale problems an
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 30
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814
variables the presented preprocessing method of this paper quantitative way. ANOVA uses the variance of the model
could work with IOSO to gain better results. due to the design variables on the approximation function.
By their proposed method, applying the data mining task
4.5.1 Case Study of clustering, the effect of each design variable on the
objective functions can be calculated and visualized.
It was proved that data mining tasks could be applied for
In an approach to find the optimal Pareto solutions for the
processing the inputs’ and outputs’ data of numerical
complex and nonlinear mathematical problem of designing
analysis systems. Fig.3 describes the expected data
the curves by multicriteria optimization, including three
preprocessing step in the general workflow of MCDM
conflicting objectives, an IOSO-based technique has been
process. The data set of problems including the numerical
utilized [21]. The aim was to incorporate several design
analysis records for some calculations before the MOO
objectives into a single optimization process. There was
process in a preprocessing step are analyzed applying the
numerous numbers of input variables therefore the
classification of data mining. After preprocessing the
problem was modeled several times with a different
design space is reduced which will make the rest of the
number, and different configuration, of input variables. It
process less complicated.
was observed that including or excluding some variables
from the same class could make a huge difference to the
final estimated model. Therefore the preparation phase of
L arge amount of variables/objectives
selecting the variables should be done with complete
accuracy. This fact has motivated current research to try
alternative speedy techniques besides those of DOE tools-
Preprocessed Computer
in order to manage the design space- by classifying, Simulation
Preprocessing MOO Visualization
identifying, ranking and/or removing variables based on
Variables s
tasks
the training data sets.
5. Preprocessing and Data Mining
New variables configuration Decision-
Making
As was mentioned the different tasks of MOO and Fig.3 General Workflow for MOO including preprocessing
decision-making in engineering optimization applications
applying Meta-modeling have the common difficulty of
5.1 Proposed Methodology
dealing with the large amounts of input variables, design
variables, decision variables and objectives. The decision-
Our proposed method [6] is based on the classification
maker often has no idea about the importance of the
task of data mining showing the effect of each design
variables. Thus it is difficult to organize the number of
variable on the objectives. In this method the target
variables based on expert knowledge. Additionally
categorical variable is defined as the result value of
variable ranking is also a difficult task, especially when
numerical analysis performed by any of the Computer
several computer simulations, objectives and decision
Aided Engineering packages. The target categorical
makers are involved.
variable might be partitioned in different classes. We
The decision maker in creating a new project faces a high
would classify the target categorical variable for the
amount of variables and objectives which makes the
experiments and their dependent input variables which are
process very complex. Ranking or identifying the less
not in our database based on other characteristics
important variables and objectives, and following it,
associated with them. The classification algorithm would
reducing the number of variables and even objectives
examine the data set containing both the input variables
which have minimum effects on results, could make the
and the classified target variable. Then the algorithm
process less complicated and speedier. In this regard, there
would learn about which combinations of input variables
haven’t been adequate publications yet though it was
are associated with which class of target categorical
assumed that analyzing the inputs and outputs of
variable. The achieved knowledge will deliver the training
engineering numerical analysis for some records could
set.
deliver enough information for estimating the whole
The data mining classifier package of Weka provides
system behavior.
implementations of learning algorithms and data sets
The most related work has been done by Obayashi et al
which could be preprocessed and feed into a learning
[27]. They utilize the Analysis Of Variance (ANOVA)
scheme, analyzing the classifier results and its
approach of data mining and the effect of each design
performance.
variable to the objectives and the constraint functions in a
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 31
www.IJCSI.org
Note, that Weka includes methods for all the standard data computational simulation runs, forty two variables and
mining problems such as regression and classification three objectives. Three different data mining classification
which are necessary for the proposed approach. Weka algorithms were applied (J48, BFTree, LADTree) and
also includes many data visualization facilities and data their performance was compared in order to choose
preprocessing tools. attribute importance. As the result LADTree was found to
One algorithm of WEKA, the BFTree, is chosen to search be a better choice for further classifications.
the whole design space for the input variables where there The intention in Meta-modeling based optimization
are no records of target categorical variable. Based on the problems due to costly computational simulation is to run
classifications in the training set, the algorithm would be minimum simulation runs as much as possible. Thus in the
able to classify these records as well. given example there was an attempt to minimize the
As the computational simulations by most of the number of simulations to five calculations.
engineering packages are very expensive and time
consuming, the data sets of most Meta-modeling based 6. Given Example
optimization problems are unable to find the information
of the whole design space. In this situation classification
The example is given in aerospace engineering where the
could work efficiently to estimate the entire design space.
structural simulation is tightly integrated into more than
The workflow of proposed methodology is described in
one discipline and criterion. Meanwhile, the trend
Fig.4. Here the classification method is utilized to create
nowadays is to utilize independent computational codes
several classifiers or decision trees. In the next steps the
for each discipline. In this situation, the aim of MCDM
most important variables which have more effects on the
tools is to develop methods in order to guarantee that
objectives are selected.
effective physical variables be involved. In order to
approach the optimal shape in aerospace engineering
Training set Effective
optimization problems, the MOO techniques are asked to
Variables
Variable
deal with all important objectives and variables efficiently.
Dataset Classification Selection
The example has been given in shape optimization of a 3D
airfoil with objectives in displacements distribution. In the
similar cases in [4, 5, and 14] for aerodynamic
Fig.4 proposed methodology workflow optimization of a 3D wing there was an attempt to utilize
the MOO techniques applying GA in a multidisciplinary
Regressions and model trees are constructed by a decision
environment. In their approach the geometry of points X
tree to build an initial tree. However, most decision tree
and Y are actually input variables. All possible variables
algorithms choose the splitting attribute to maximize the
have been involved in the optimization process ignoring
information gain. It is appropriate for numeric prediction
their effects on objectives. It is assumed that the
to minimize the intra subset variation in the class values
preprocessing of the available records of simulations can
under each branch. The splitting criterion is used to
identify the most effective variables and running the MOO
determine which variable is the better to split the portion T
with just effective variables could dramatically decrease
of the training data. Based on the treating of the standard
the MOO computational costs. The approaches such as
deviation of the objective values in T, as a measure of the
applied MOO GA-based in [14] could be more effective
error and calculation, the expected reduction in error as a
and less complicated, taking less computation time, if they
result of testing each variable is calculated. The variables
were modeled just by effective variables.
which maximize the expected error reduction are chosen
for splitting. The splitting process terminates when the
objective values of the instances vary very slightly, that is,
when their standard deviation has only a small fraction of
the standard deviation of the original instance set. Splitting
also terminates when just a few instances remain.
The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared
Error (RMSE) of the class probability is estimated and
a) b)
assigned by the algorithm output. The RMSE is the square
Fig.5 Airfoil geometry modeled by S-plines
root of the average quadratic loss and the MAE is
calculated in a similar way using the absolute instead of The airfoil of Fig.5 part (a) is subjected to shape
the squared difference. optimization. The shape needs to be optimized in order to
In the first preprocessing approach-utilizing the proposed deliver minimum displacement distribution in terms of
method [6] - the database was created by twelve applied pressure on the surface. Fig.5 (b) shows the basic
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 32
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814
curves of the surface modeled by S-plines. For modeling 0,1.01,1.21,1,0.8, O1=e
0.4,0.21,0-0.41,- O2=d
the surface four profiles have been utilized with forty two 0.47,-0.59,-0.79,-
points. The coordinates of all points are supplied by a 0.69,
5 0,0.80,1.01,0.86,0.6
digitizer, each point includes three dimensions of X, Y, 4,0.26,-0.01,-0.20,-
0.40,-0.40,-0.72,-
and Z. Consequently there are 126 columns plus two 0.56,
objectives. Objectives are listed as follow: 0,0.58,0.76,0.58,0.3
1,0,-0.23,-0.23,-
 Objective1(O1): Minimizing the displacements 0.37,-0.37
0,0.24,0.52,0.38,-
distribution in the airfoil for constant pressure value of α 0.06,-0.10,-0.10,
 Objective2(O1): Minimizing the displacements
distribution in the airfoil for constant pressure value of
In the given example the target categorical variable is the
2α
value of Displacements Distribution calculated by
numerical simulation in ANSYS and classified in 4 classes
An optimal configuration of forty two variables is
of a, b, c and, d. In the data sets of geometrical and
supposed to satisfy the two described objectives.
numerical analysis objective values taken for analysis are
In the described MOO preprocessing the number of
given in table.1. This table has gathered initial data sets
variables is subjected to minimization before any MOO
including the geometry of shapes and numerical
process takes place in order to reduce the design space and
simulations from five calculations, based on random initial
computational costs.
values of variables.
Table 1: data sets including five calculations' results
Variables CAD Model Displacement Objective 6.1 Results
Configuration : Distribution Results
V1-V42
0,1,1.2,1,0.8,0.4,0.2 O1=c
The obtained results from preprocessing are available in
,0,-0.4,-0.48, 0.6,- O2=c
0.8,-0.72, table.2. Eight variables out of forty two have been selected
1 0,0.84,0.99,0.84,0.6
2,0.26,0,-0.20,- that have more effects on O1 and, seven variables that
0.40,-0.36,-0.70,- have more effects on O2. Two types of classification error
0.58,0,0.59,0.78,0.5
6,0.30,0,-0.21,- (MAE, RMSE) are shown for utilized algorithm
0.24,-0.38,-0.38
0,0.26,0.50,0.39,- corresponding to different classes of objectives.
0.03,-0.10,-0.12, Experiments show that the obtained results are not very
0,1.1,1.21,.9,0.82,0. O1=b
42,0.18,.1,-0.41,- O2=c sensitive to the exact choice of these thresholds.
0.46,-0.62,-0.81,-
0.70,
2 0,0.86,0.1,0.82,0.60
,0.25,0.01,-0.20,-
0.39,-0.39,-0.70,- Table 2: Variables importance ranking for three classification methods
0.58, Classification MAE RMSE Effective Variables Objectives
0,0.58,0.76,0.57,0 Algorithm
.32,0,-0.21,-0.23,-
LADTree 0.370 0.517 38,15,24,2,32,41,39,3 O
0.37,-0.39 1
0,0.26,0.54,0.40,- 0.412 0.519 41,35,9,17,11,38,37 O 2
0.03,-0.1,-0.1,
0,1,1.2,1,0.8,0.4,0 O1=a
.2,0,-0.4,-0.48,- O2=e
0.6,-0.8,-0.72,
3 0,.88,0.99,0.84,0.62
,0.26,0,-0.23,-0.35,-
0.37,-0.70,-0.54,
7. Discussion
0,0.58,0.76,0.58,0.3
1,0,-0.23,-0.23,-
0.37,-0.37
0,0.24,0.50,0.40,-
The whole preprocessing was done within 6.3 minutes on
0.03,-0.13,-0.10,
0,1.3,1.23,1.06,0.83 O1=d a Pentium IV 2.4 MHZ Processor. The variables were
,0.41,0.28,0.07,- O2=c
0.41,-0.48,-0.6,- reduced by 50%.
0.8,0.78,0,0.84,.92, The data set of the given MOO problem was preprocessed
4 0.84,0.62,0.26,0,-
0.23,-0.39,-0.37,- and effective variables have been identified. With the
0.70,-
0.54,0,0.58,0.76,0.5 results of the preprocessing analyzes presented in table.2
8,0.31,0,-0.24,- the optimization problem has been much clear in terms of
0.22,-0.36,-0.38,
0,0.24,0.52,0.38,- variable and objective interactions. The new created
0.02,-0.12,-0.12,
design space based on the new sets of variables listed in
table.2 is much smaller which would make the further
Meta-modeling based MOO much easier in terms of
complexity. By adjusting the MAE and RMSE in each
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 33
www.IJCSI.org
classification preprocessing the expected number of [5] András Sz, Miroslav Šmíd, Jaroslav Hájek, "Aerodynamic
variables could be arranged. For the given example we Optimization via multi-objective micro-genetic algorithm
were expecting more than a 50% reduction in design space With range adaptation, knowledge-based reinitialization",
Advances in Engineering Software Vol. 40, 2009, pp.419–
for the errors available in table.2.
430.
[6] M.Esmaeili, A.Mosavi, “Variable Reduction for Multi-
8. Conclusions
Objective Optimization Using Data Mining Techniques;
Application to Aerospace Structures", IEEE Proc. of
The classification task of data mining has been introduced international conf. on On Mechanical and Aerospace
as an effective option for identifying the most effective Engineering, 2010.
variables of the MOO in MCDM systems. The [7] Alan Klanac, Soren Ehlers, Jasmin Jelovica, "Optimization
of Crashworthy marine structures", Marine Structures,
Classification algorithm of LADTree was utilized
Vol.22, No.5, 2009, pp. 670–690.
analyzing the effect of each design variable to the
[8] Li Xuebin, "Study of multi-objective optimization and multi
indentified objectives. The number of the optimization
attribute decision-making for economic and environmental
variables has been managed very effectively and reduced
power dispatch", Electric Power Systems Research Vol.79,
in the given example. No.12, 2009,pp. 789–79.
The modified methodology is demonstrated successfully [9] K. Vergidis, A. Tiwari, B. Majeed, R. Roy, "Optimisation
in the framework. The author believes that the process is of business process designs: An algorithmic approach with
simple and fast. Variables were reduced and organized multiple objectives", Int. J. Production Economics, Vol.109,
utilizing classification algorithms. The achieved No.10, 2007, pp.105–121.
[10] Zohar Laslo, Albert I. Goldberg, "Resource allocation under
preprocessing results as reduced variables will speed up
uncertainty in a multi-project matrix environment: Is
the process of optimization due to delivered smaller design
organizational conflict inevitable?" International Journal of
space and minimum requested computational cost for
Project Management, Vol. 26, No.2, 2008, pp. 773–788.
MOO process. Data mining tools have been found to be
[11] Arularasan & Velraj, "modeling and simulation of a parallel
effective in this regard. It is evident that the growing plate heat sink using computational fluid dynamics", Int J
complexity of MCDM systems could be handled by a Adv Manuf Technol, Vol.5, No.7, 2008,pp.172-183.
preprocessing step utilizing data mining classification [12] A.I. Olcer, "a hybrid approach for multi-objective
tools. combinatorial optimization problems in ship design and
For future work, studying the effectiveness of the shipping", Computers & Operations Research, Vol. 35,
introduced data reduction process in different applications No.9, 2007, pp.2760 – 277.
[13] Katharina witkowski, "Data mining and visualization of
is suggested. Also trying to use other tools of data mining
Pareto", 7th European LS-DYNA conference proceeding
such as clustering, association rules, and comparison could
2009.
produce beneficial results.
[14] YIN Bo, XUDian, ANY, "Aerodynamic optimization of 3D
wing based on iSIGHT", Appl. Math. Mech. -Engl. Ed,
Vol.5, 2008,pp. 603–610.
Acknowledgments
[15] Albers and N. Leon-Rovira, "Development of an engine
crankshaft in a framework of computer-aided innovation,
Author would like to thank his supervisors; Professor
Computers in Industry", Vol.60, 2009, pp. 604–612.
Nagy Péter Tibor, Professor Miklós Hoffmann and Daniel [16] J.D. Zhang, G. Rong, "An MILP model for multi-period
Haitas. Also the effort of SIGMA technology to support optimization of fuel gas system scheduling in refinery and
our academic research is aknowledged. its marginal value analysis", chemical engineering research
and design, Vol.86. No.11, 2008, pp. 141 – 151.
[17] Rajan Filomeno Coelho, Piotr Breitkopf, Catherine Knopf-
Lenoir, "Model reduction for multidisciplinary optimization
References
- application to a 2D wing", Struct Multidisc Optim, 2008,
[1] Claus Hillermeier, "Nonlinear multiobjective optimization:
pp. 29–48.
a generalized homotopy approach", Birkhäuser Verlag,
[18] Rajkumar Roy, Srichand Hinduja, Roberto Teti, "recent
2001.
advances in engineering design optimisation: Challenges
[2] Kaisa Miettinen, "Nonlinear multiobjective optimization",
and future trends", CIRP Annals - Manufacturing
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
Technology, Vol.12, 2008, pp. 697–715.
[3] Xinwei SHU, Chuangang GU, Jun XIAO, Chuang GAO,
[19] B. Daniel Marjavaara, "CFD Driven Optimization of
"Centrifugal compressor blade optimization based on
Hydraulic Turbine Draft Tubes using Surrogate Models",
uniform design and genetic algorithms", Front Energy
doctoral thesis, Luleå University of TechnologyDepartment
Power Eng China.Vol.5, No.3, 2008, pp. 453–456.
of Applied Physics and Mechanical EngineeringDivision of
[4] Zhang Yongc, "Robust Airfoil Optimization with Multi-
Fluid Mechanics, Lulea, Sweden 2006.
objective Estimation of Distribution Algorithm", Chinese
[20] Jurgen Branke Kalyanmoy Deb, Kaisa Miettinen Roman
Journal of Aeronautics, Vol.20, No.2, 2009, pp. 289-295.
Słowi´nski, "Multiobjective Optimization", springer, 2008.
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 2, No 1, March 2010 34
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814
[21] A.Mosavi, Miklós Hoffmann, "Design of curves by technical report, university of Debrecen faculty of
multicriteria optimization; Utilizing IOSO packages", a informatics, Debrecen, Hungary, 2010.
[22] E. Zitzler and L. Thiele. "Multiobjective evolutionary Configurations", American Institute of Aeronautics and
algorithms:A comparative case study and the strength pareto Astronautics, Aug. 22, 2007
approach." IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary [28] David Hand, Heikki Mannila, and Padhraic Smyth,
Computation, Vol.3, No4, 1999, pp.257–271. "Principles of Data Mining", MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
[23] J.N. Morse. "Reducing the size of the nondominated set: 2001.
Pruning by clustering". Computers and Operations [29] Andy Pryke, Sanaz Mostaghim, Alireza Nazemi, "Heatmap
Research, Vol.7, No.1–2, 1980, pp.55–66. Visualization of Population Based Multi Objective
[24] H. Nakayama. "Aspiration level approach to interactive Algorithms", Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
multiobjective programming and its applications". In P. M. Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007
Pardalos, Y. Siskos, and C. Zopounidis, editors, Advances [30] Indirect Optimization on the basis of Self-Organization
in Multicriteria Analysis, Kluwer Academic Publishers, (IOSO), http://www.iosotech.com/ioso_tech.htm, (accessed
Dordrecht, 1995. Nov 7, 2009).
[25] H. Nakayama and Y. Sawaragi. "Satisficing trade-off [31] C.-L. Hwang and A. S. M. Masud. "Multiple Objective
method for multiobjective programming". In M. Grauer and Decision Making – Methods and Applications: A State-of-
A. P. Wierzbicki, editors, Interactive Decision Analysis, the-Art Survey". Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1979.
Springer- Verlag, Berlin, 1984.
[26] Obayashi, S. and Sasaki, D., "Visualization and Data Mining of
Pareto Solutions Using Self-Organizing Map," Evolutionary A. Mosavi is a PhD candidate at University of Debrecen;
Multi-Criterion Optimization (EMO2003), LNCS 2632, Faculty of Informatics. He received his MS (2007) in
Springer, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 796-809.
automotive engineering from London Kinston University,
[27] Shigeru Obayashi, Shinkyu Jeong, Kazuhisa Chiba,
UK. His current research interest is Multiple Criteria
"Multiobjective Design Exploration for Aerodynamic
Decision-Making in automotive and aerospace
engineering. He has many publications in this subject.
