Natural Language Processing for Requirements
Traceability
Jin L.C. Guo1[0000−0003−1782−1545], Jan-Philipp Stegh¨ofer2[0000−0003−1694−0972],
Andreas Vogelsang3[0000−0003−1041−0815], and Jane
Cleland-Huang4[0000−0001−9436−5606]
1 McGill University, Canada
2 XITASO GmbH IT & Software Solutions, Germany
3 University of Cologne, Germany
4 University of Notre Dame, USA
Abstract. Traceability,theabilitytotracerelevantsoftwareartifactsto
supportreasoningaboutthequalityofthesoftwareanditsdevelopment
process, plays a crucial role in requirements and software engineering,
particularlyforsafety-criticalsystems.Inthischapter,weprovideacom-
prehensiveoverviewoftherepresentativetasksinrequirementtraceabil-
ity for which natural language processing (NLP) and related techniques
havemadeconsiderableprogressinthepastdecade.Wefirstpresentthe
definition of traceability in the context of requirements and the over-
all engineering process, as well as other important concepts related to
traceability tasks. Then, we discuss two tasks in detail, including trace
link recovery and trace link maintenance. We also introduce two other
relatedtasksconcerningwhentracelinksareusedinpracticalcontexts.
For each task, we explain the characteristics of the task, how it can be
approachedthroughNLPtechniques,andhowtodesignandconductthe
experiment to demonstrate the performance of the NLP techniques. We
furtherdiscusspracticalconsiderationsonhowtoeffectivelyapplyNLP
techniquesandassesstheireffectivenessregardingthedatasetcollection,
the metrics selection, and the role of humans when evaluating the NLP
approaches. Overall, this chapter prepares the readers with the funda-
mentalknowledgeofdesigningautomatedtraceabilitysolutionsenabled
by NLP in practice.
1 Fundamentals of Requirements Traceability
Requirements Traceability is defined by the Center of Excellence for Software
and Systems Traceability (CoEST)5 as the ability to link a requirement back to
contributing sources such as stakeholders’ rationales, hazards to be mitigated,
and regulatory codes, and forward to corresponding design artifacts, code, and
test cases. A well-traced project serves as an indicator that a rigorous devel-
opment process has been followed, and supports critical engineering activities
such as requirements verification and validation, change impact analysis, safety
5 http://sarec.nd.edu/coest/
4202
yaM
71
]ES.sc[
1v54801.5042:viXra
2 Guo et al.
Trace retrieved
Trace Matrix
Trace stored
Trace
Creating requested & Using
NLPSupported created
Just-in-time
Creation
feedback Use
feedback
Planning and
Trace Managing
planned
Maintenance Maintenance
feedback planned
Trace created or
removed Maintaining
NLP Supported
Change detected
Fig.1.RequirementsTraceabilityincludesfourfundamentalactivitiesofplanningand
managing the traceability strategy, creating links, maintaining links, and ultimately
usinglinks.NLPisparticularlyusefulforsupportingtracelinkcreationandevolution.
analysis,softwareandsystemscompliance,anddownstreamactivitiessuchasre-
gression testing. Given these benefits, traceability is required in many regulated
domains which often prescribe the types of software artifacts to be created and
the traceability paths to be established. The traditional tracing process involves
planning and managing a traceability strategy, creating and maintaining links,
and finally using links as illustrated in Figure 1.
In practice, the cost and effort of creating and maintaining trace links in
a continually evolving software system is often perceived as excessively high,
and therefore developers and other project stakeholders tend to avoid the over-
headunlessrequiredbyregulations.Severalresearchershaveshownthatevenin
regulated domains, trace links are often established in a relatively ad-hoc way,
potentially as an afterthought for certification processes, leading to problems
suchasincomplete,incorrect,redundant,andevenconflictingtracelinks.Given
all of these problems, traceability has traditionally been rarely used outside of
regulated domains.
However, traceability can be so much more than this. A previously pub-
lishedFutureofSoftwareEngineering(FOSE)paper[6]laidoutthechallengeof
achieving ubiquitous traceability. In this vision, traceability was fully integrated
into the engineering process without any additional human effort needed to cre-
ate or maintain trace links, and links were automatically generated and evolved
throughcollecting,analyzing,andprocessingeverypieceofevidencefromwhich
trace data could be inferred and managed. Realizing this vision would mean
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 3
that all projects across diverse domains, whether safety-critical or not, large or
small, simple or complex, would benefit at no additional cost and effort from
thepresenceofubiquitoustraceability.Thisisparticularlyimportantgiventhat
the requirements landscape has changed dramatically over the past couple of
decades. While some projects, especially those in the safety-critical domain still
focus on traditional requirements processes, there are many other projects, in
which traditional requirements are replaced by user stories or issues, and trace-
ability, if it does exist, is, by necessity, more dynamic.
This chapter lays out some of the cutting-edge work in the traceability do-
mainthathassoughttoleverageNaturalLanguageProcessing(NLP)toseethis
vision become a reality. NLP-based tracing techniques can be used to augment
a more traditional development approach by helping practitioners to construct
and maintain trace links. They can also be used to dynamically generate just-
in-time trace links as and when needed by practitioners. As NLP techniques
continue to evolve, supported by advanced Generative AI techniques such as
Large Language Models (LLMs), the vision of ubiquitous traceability becomes
increasingly plausible.
In the remainder of this chapter, we discuss a selection of important top-
ics on applying NLP for traceability. We start with the most investigated task
called trace link recovery (TLR), a task aiming to identify valid trace links
from two sets of software engineering artifacts (Section 2). We then discuss how
to maintain the validity of the trace links as the project evolves (Section 3).
Additionally, we direct the attention to two other often overlooked aspects of
automated traceability solutions, including generating explanations on why two
artifacts are linked and classifying trace links to more fine-grained categories
that better support project management (Section 4).
2 Trace Link Recovery
Overthepastdecades,numeroussolutionshavebeenproposedtomeettheneed
fortracelinkrecovery,rangingfrompopularinformationretrievalapproachesto
the latest Generative AI based approaches. This section discusses the represen-
tative methods from each line of work.
2.1 Task Specification
Tracelinkrecovery(TLR)(ortraceretrieval[6])isthetaskofidentifyingtrace-
ability relations within an existing set of artifacts. Formally, the TLR task can
be represented by two sets of artifacts: sources S and targets T. TLR is the
task to find a relation R ⊆ S × T such that (s,t) ∈ R iff s and t are in a
traceabilityrelation.TLRcanbeconductedintwomodes:(1)startingfromone
sourceartifact,allrelatedtargetartifactsshallbedetermined,or(2)acomplete
traceabilitymodelshallberecoveredbyrecoveringtracelinksforall sourceand
target artifacts.
4 Guo et al.
TLRisparticularlyrelevantinpracticesincetracelinksareoftennotcreated
and maintained systematically from the beginning of a project or get lost over
time. If traceability is needed later (e.g., for certification or impact analysis),
TLR can help recover the underlying traceability information.
TLRisprobablythemoststudiedtaskintheareaoftraceability.Zhaoetal.
conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) on using NLP for RE tasks and
identified53publicationsfocusingonTLRapproaches[45].TLRisadoptedtore-
lateartifactsfromvariousactivitiesinthedevelopmentlifecycle.Pauzietal.[35]
conducted an SLR specifically on NLP for software traceability and identified
TLR approaches for a broad range of artifacts covering trace links between re-
quirements and code, design artifacts, test cases, other requirements, and arti-
facts from operations.
2.2 Approaches
TLR approaches use techniques from information retrieval, (shallow) machine
learning, or deep learning. More recently, generative AI models have also been
used to solve TLR by prompting LLMs.
Information Retrieval A good overview of TLR approaches that use meth-
ods from information retrieval (IR) is given in the systematic mapping study
conducted by Borg et al. [4].
The premise of IR-based approaches is that when two artifacts have a high
degree of textual similarity, they should most likely be traced [34]. Commonly
used IR algorithms include Vector Space Models (VSM), Latent Semantic In-
dexing (LSI), and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA).
Vector Space Models (VSM). Vector space models are algebraic models that
represent documents and queries as vectors d = (w ,...,w ),q = (q ,...,q ).
1 N 1 N
Each dimension 1,...,N corresponds to a separate term of the entire corpus. If
atermoccursinthedocument,itsvalueinthevectorisnon-zero.Thedefinition
ofterm dependsontheapplication.Typicallytermsaresinglewords,keywords,
or longer phrases. If words are chosen to be the terms, the dimensionality of the
vector is the number of words in the vocabulary (i.e., the number of distinct
words occurring in the corpus). Several different ways of computing these val-
ues, also known as weights or term weights, have been developed. Probably the
simplest approach is bag-of-words, where a vector dimension is set to 1 if and
only if the corresponding term occurs in the current document.
One of the best-known alternatives is term frequency-inverse document fre-
quency(TF-IDF)weighting,whichhas,forexample,beenusedbyHayesetal.[14].
TF-IDF defines a product of local (specific for a document) and global (valid
fortheentirecorpus)parameters.WithTF-IDF,thevalueofdimensioniinthe
vector for document d=(w ,...,w ) is calculated by w =tf (d)·idf , where
1 N i i i
tf (d) is the (usually normalized) frequency of word w in the document d and
i i
idf , is computed as idf = log ( n ) where n is the number of documents in
i i 2 df
i
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 5
the corpus and df is the number of documents in which word w occurs. Intu-
i i
itively, TF-IDF provides high values to terms that occur frequently in a specific
document but rarely in other documents of the corpus.
Invectorspacemodels,vectoroperationscanbeusedtocomparedocuments
with queries (e.g., cosine similarity [14] or Jaccard similarity [10]).
While TLR based on vector space models is relatively easy to implement,
compute,andinterpret,ithassomeseveredrawbacks.First,vectorspacemodels
are sensitive to exact word matching. Word substrings or synonyms used in
queries will not be considered similar to words in the documents. This may be
mitigatedbypreprocessingstepssuchasstemming,lemmatization,orstopword
removal, or by including information from thesauri [14]. Secondly, traditional
VSMs neglect contextual information associated with a word such as the order
of words or the specific surroundings of words.
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). To overcome the challenge of dealing with
synonymsandincludingcontextualinformation,someapproachesutilizeLatent
SemanticIndexing(LSI)[24,14].LSIreducesthedimensionsofthevectorspace,
findingsemi-dimensionsusingsingularvaluedecomposition.Thenewdimensions
are no longer individual terms, but concepts represented as combinations of
terms. The number of dimensions to which LSI reduces the vector space is a
parameter, which can also be optimized based on existing data. In the overview
byBorgetal.[4],mostLSI-basedapproachesreducedthenumberofdimensions
toanabsolutevaluebetween10–20ortoarelativevaluebetween20%and50%.
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). As an alternative to algebraic models such
asVSMandLSI,researchershavealsotestedstatisticalmodelsfromthefieldof
IR [34,2]. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a statistical model that clusters
documents based on hidden latent variables (called topics) in the underlying
data. The input to LDA is a term-by-document matrix, which is derived from
any vector space model. This m×n matrix assigns a value to each term and
eachdocumentbased,forexample,onitsTF-IDFvalue,wheremisthenumber
of terms and n is the number of documents. LDA takes this term-by-document
matrix as input and generates as output a k × n matrix Θ, called topic-by-
document matrix, where k is the number of topics. An entry Θ of the topic-
ij
by-document matrix denotes the probability of the jth document belonging to
the ith topic. Since typically k << m, LDA is mapping the documents from
the space of terms (m) into a smaller space of topics (k). The latent topics
allowtheclusteringofdocumentsbasedontheirsharedtopics.Morespecifically,
documentshavingthesamerelevanttopicsaregroupedinthesamecluster,and
documents having different topics belong to different clusters.
For example, in a requirements specification for autonomous driving, the
terms pedestrian, rain, road, and construction site would suggest a driving con-
text theme, while the terms distracted, eyes, navigation, steering, and hands-off
would suggest a driver-related theme. There may be many more topics in the
collection,e.g.,topicsrelatedtocarstate,energycontrol,sensoravailability,be-
havior,etc.thatwedonotdiscussforsimplicity’ssake.Stopwordsinalanguage
6 Guo et al.
areusuallyfilteredoutbypre-processingbeforeLDAisperformed.Additionally,
stemming or lemmatization might help improve the results of the LDA. If the
document collection is sufficiently large, LDA will discover such sets of terms
(i.e., topics) based upon the co-occurrence of individual terms, though the task
ofassigningameaningfullabeltoanindividualtopic(i.e.,thatallthetermsare
driver-related) is up to the user, and often requires specialized knowledge (e.g.,
for collection of technical documents). For TLR, however, it is not necessary to
assignmeaningfullabelstothetopicssincethetopicswillonlybeusedtorecover
trace links. This is done by comparing a document’s distribution over topics Θ
d
to determine the topical content of the document. For instance, if there are 4
topics and if Θ = [0.5,0.1,0.05,0.35], then one can infer that document d is
d
mainly comprised of a combination of topics 1 and 4. Note that Θ can also
d
be compared against other Θ′ (using a similarity measure such as Kullback-
d
Leibler divergence or cosine distance) to obtain a ranked list of topically similar
documents.
Oliveto et al. [34] have used LDA to recover trace links between use cases
and classes in source code. Asuncion et al. [2] used LDA to develop a general
search engine for all kinds of textual documents related to a project.
(Shallow) Machine Learning Withthebreakthroughsthatmachinelearning
methods have achieved since the early 2010s, methods from machine learning
(ML)havealsobeenusedtosolveTLRandmanyotherrequirementsengineering
(RE)tasks.TLRisoftenframedasaclassificationtaskandsolvedbysupervised
learning methods [10,28,38]. In contrast to the IR approaches mentioned above,
where ground truth data is only needed to evaluate the performance of the
approach, ML methods need a ground truth (both links and non-links) as an
inputtolearnaclassifierthatislaterusedtopredicttracelinksbetweenunseen
data.
possible links training set
link Feature Classifier
Preprocessing
Extraction Training
… …
no_link
… … trained classifier
unlabeled set
Feature Label
Preprocessing
Extraction Prediction
Set A Set B Set A Set B
Fig.2. Schematic pipeline for an ML classifier for TLR.
AtypicalpipelinefortrainingandusinganMLclassifierisshowninFigure2.
The input for the pipeline is a dataset T that consists of two sets A and B of
documents with existing trace links between documents of the two sets. This
dataset serves as a ground truth that is used to train and evaluate the classifier.
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 7
As one of the first steps, the dataset needs to be split into disjoint sets that are
used for training, testing, and validating the classifier. How the dataset is split
influences implicit biases and information leakage, which may let the classifier
look better than it is in a productive environment. A k-fold cross-validation
strategymitigatessucharisk,wherethedatasetisrandomlysplitintok equally
largefoldsofwhichk−1foldsareusedtotraintheclassifierand1foldisusedto
test it. This procedure is run k times such that eachdata point is tested exactly
once. A more elaborate discussion about appropriate ways to split the data for
training classifiers in SE has been published by Dell’Anna et al. [8].
Thetrainingdatamaythenbepreprocessed(e.g.,stemming,lemmatization,
stop word removal), and afterward transformed into a vector representation.
Thisstepiscrucialsinceitdefinestheinformationthatthelearnercanleverage.
Tocalculatedocumentvectors,researchershaveusedseveraltechniquesranging
from textual similarity [10], over more specialized features [10], or combinations
of such [28,38].
The classification task is then defined as: Given one artifact from the two
sets in the training data, predict whether there exists a trace link between them
or not. Thus, the task is a binary classification task with classes {link,no link}.
Any pair of documents d and d , such that d ∈ A and d ∈ B, is assigned
1 2 1 2
either link or no link as a label depending on whether there exists a trace link
in the ground truth or not.
Theresultingtrainingsetisusuallyveryimbalancedbecausetherearemany
more no link than link labels. Imbalanced data can bias the trained model to
learnfrequenciesinsteadofinputcharacteristics.Therefore,thetrainingdataset
needs to be balanced to contain a similar number of document pairs with a link
and without a link. This can be achieved by techniques such as undersampling
or oversampling.
To prepare the data for the training process, the vectors of the two input
documents are concatenated and then fed into some ML algorithm suited for
classificationtasks(e.g.,NaiveBayes[28,10,38],LogisticalRegression[28],Ran-
dom Forest [28,38], Support Vector Machines [28]).
To predict labels for unseen data, the learned model is fed with a pair of
documents that have gone through the same preprocessing steps as the training
data. The model then predicts a label link or no link for the document pair at
hand.
Deep Learning The performance of the aforementioned (shallow) machine
learning approaches relies on how well the extracted features can capture the
relevant semantic concepts and their relations. Deep learning offers better mod-
els to capture these semantics, especially by exploiting the context, in which a
certain term is used. Therefore, the pipeline shown in Figure 2 is used similarly
for deep learning approaches. Deep learning models can be used to transform a
document into a richer and denser input vector or to serve as more advanced
classification models.
8 Guo et al.
Instead of using manually crafted features or simple text similarity mea-
sures, Guo et al. [11] used pretrained word embeddings as input representations
fordocuments.Wordembeddingsarehigh-dimensionalvectorrepresentationsof
words that have been learned by performing an unsupervised learning task on a
corresponding text corpus. Popular word embedding models such as word2vec,
GloVe, or fastText have been trained on large sets of general-purpose texts and
thus provide vector representations for words that reflect their meaning in doc-
uments quite well.
Deep learning also offers new classification algorithms specifically suited to
extract higher-level structures and patterns in textual data. Guo et al. [11] used
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) as a classification model, which learns to
predict the labels on the basis sequences of word embedding vectors. RNNs are
specifically good at learning patterns in sequential data. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) is another deep learning classification model used for require-
ments classification [44], among the others.
Pretrainedwordembeddingsprovidedmajoradvancementsbuthadtheprob-
lem that they could not reflect the specifics of certain technical domains and
jargon used in requirements. Moreover, although word embeddings have been
learned based on contextual use, they assign the same vector representation to
a word independent of the context in which it is currently used. This limitation
hasledtothedevelopmentofLargeLanguageModels(LLMs)suchasBERT[9]
that are trained on even larger amounts of data and can produce contextual-
ized embeddings that are different depending on the context in which a word is
used [43].
Lin et al. [17] were among the first to use the BERT model for TLR. BERT
has a transformer architecture, which consists of two stages. The first is the
creation of a foundation model, a language model for text in this case. This is
donebyunsupervisedrepresentationlearningonalargesetofdocumentsrelated
to the traceability task. Such foundation models can be reused for several tasks
(notonlyTLR),andseveralpretrainedmodelsarealreadypubliclyavailable.In
thesecondphase,thepretrainedmodelsarefine-tunedtothespecificTLRtask.
This is done by continuing the training process with labeled data and adding a
classification layer on top of the BERT architecture.
GenerativeAI Largelanguagemodelshaveledtoconsiderablybetterresultsin
solving TLR as a classification task. In parallel, LLMs have been used generally
for text generation and conversational systems. Systems like ChatGPT offer
a linguistic interface to interact with and query LLMs through user-provided
prompts. Rodriguez et al. [39] tested the capability of Claude, a generative AI
model, to solve TLR tasks directly by prompting it with instructions in natural
language. They have shown that generative models can not only solve TLR
tasks but can also be used to request more information about the reasons for
the identified trace links. The authors further recognized the need for further
research on how to craft effective prompts for TLR. The following is a concrete
example provided by the authors for prompting the LLM to solve TLR:
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 9
 Prompt
Belowareartifactsfromthesamesoftwaresystem.Isthereatraceability
link between (1) and (2)?
(1) The DPU-TMALI shall utilize SCM-DCI-SR, along with ERRNO
providedbyDPU-DCItodecodeerrorsandplacethemonanerrorqueue
for DPU-CCM.
(2) Error Collection and Reporting: At boot time, no error queue exists
because it has yet to be created. Errors that occur in this early stage of
error reporting are assigned directly to the global task variable errno. If
errno is set after the error queues are created, it is queued to the Error
Queue by calling ccmErrEnq().
 LLM Output
Yes, there is a traceability link between (1) and (2). (1) mentions that
the DPU-TMALI places errors on an error queue for the DPU-CCM. (2)
describestheerrorcollectionandreportingmechanismoftheDPU-CCM,
specifically referring to enqueuing errors.
So(2)providesanimplementationdetailfortheerrorqueuingfunctional-
itybrieflymentionedin(1).Therefore,thereisatraceabilitylinkbetween
these two artifacts in the software system.
One challenge of conversation-based LLMs is going to be their scalability.
While having conversations about individual links, discussing hundreds of them
with the generative AI is not time- or cost-efficient. In addition, the current
approachesrequiretheusertoconstructapromptthatincludestherelevantar-
tifacts.Whilethisprocesscanbeautomated,thesheernumberofpotentialtrace
links in a reasonably sized trace data set would mean that there are thousands
of prompts to the LLM, each incurring a small, but not negligible cost. Future
work will have to address these scalability issues as well.
2.3 Evaluation
Borg et al. [4] have identified four contexts in which TLR approaches can be
evaluated(seeTable1).TLRisoftenaneedle-in-the-haystack problem,wherea
specific source artifact is compared to a large set of potential target artifacts of
which only very few are related to the source artifact (i.e., traceability matrices
are very sparse). For example, the NASA CM-1 dataset,6 which is one of the
most used public benchmarks for TLR, contains 235 high-level and 220 low-
levelrequirementswithonly361truelinks.Forthisreason,severalauthorshave
6 http://sarec.nd.edu/coest/datasets/CM1-NASA.zip
10 Guo et al.
Table 1. A context taxonomy of IR-based TLR evaluations. Level 1 is technology-
oriented, and levels 3 and 4 are human-oriented. Level 2 typically has a mixed focus.
Taken from [4].
Level 1: A strict retrieval context, perfor- Precision, Experiments
Retrieval manceisevaluatedwrt.theaccuracy recall, on benchmarks,
context of a set of search results. Quantita- F-measure possibly with
tive studies dominate. simulated feed-
back
Level 2: Afirststeptowardsrealisticapplica- MAP, DCG, Experiments
Seeking tions of the tool. A seeking context Lag, DiffAR, on benchmarks,
context withafocusonhowthehumanfinds DiffMR. possibly with
relevant information in what was re- simulated feed-
trieved by the system. Quantitative back
studies dominate.
Level 3: Humans complete real tasks but in Time spent on Controlled
Work an in-vitro setting. The goal of eval- task, experiments
task uationistoassessthecausaleffectof qualityofwork. with human
context an IR tool when completing a task. subjects.
Amixofquantitativeandqualitative
studies.
Level 4: Evaluationsinasocial-organizational User satisfac- Case studies
Project context.TheIRtoolisstudiedwhen tion,
context used by engineers within the full tool usage
complexity of an in-vivo setting.
Qualitative studies dominate.
stressedtheimportanceofrecallfor TLRapproaches.Ingeneral,thehuman-in-
the-loop should always be considered when evaluating TLR approaches [26,7].
Shin et al. [41] performed a systematic literature review on evaluations for
TLR approaches and defined three goals. Goal 1 is to find trace links with high
accuracy, e.g., to support tasks like coverage analysis. Goal 2 is to find relevant
documents excluding irrelevant documents to reduce the unnecessary effort for
human analysts. Goal 3 is to rank all documents so that the relevant ones are
near the top of the retrieved list, and also to reduce human effort.
2.4 Limitations and Concluding Remarks
Although TLR is the traceability task that most work has been published on,
existing approaches still have limitations.
TLRapproachesoftendonotgivereasonsorexplanationsfortrace
links. TLR approaches may have gone better in accurately predicting trace
links over the last few years. Yet, effective use of these approaches relies on the
capabilities of the human analyst to leverage the information recovered by the
approach. A crucial point is whether the human analyst can understand why
two artifacts are traced to each other. Unfortunately, except for the Generative
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 11
AImethods,othermethodsdiscussedabovecannotprovideexplanationsforthe
recovered links. So far, only a few approaches have addressed this important
issue specifically (see Section 4.1).
TLR approaches often do not distinguish different types of trace
links. Most TLR approaches recover trace links without any specific notion
of traceability. However, traceability information may carry different semantics.
For example, the relationship between two requirements may indicate that one
requirementrefinestheother,conflictswiththeother,isaduplicateoftheother,
or blocks the other. Detecting specific types of links is the first step toward
understanding what information and why a TLR approach has recovered a link.
However, only a few approaches currently address identifying different types of
trace links. These will be further detailed in Section 4.2.
TLR approaches often lack large enough and credible datasets.
Laliberteetal.[16]drawadireconclusion:accordingtothem,“naturallanguage
processing is likely not a practical approach to requirements traceability.” The
state of the art does indeed show the limitations of NLP for trace link recovery
andthelackof“bigdata”whichcouldbeusedtotrainlargemodelsisaninherent
propertyoftheproblem[11].Alackoflarge,opendatasetswithanagreed-upon
ground truth of links also poses a problem for researchers. Nevertheless, the
research community has continuously chipped away at the issue and novel ideas
such as using LLMs for TLR have the potential to reinvigorate the field.
3 Trace Link Maintenance
Once traceability links have been established, they need to be kept up-to-date
and maintained throughout the development lifecycle. For this purpose, some
approaches that use NLP are known and will be described in the following sec-
tions.
3.1 Task Specification
Trace link maintenance (TLM) is defined as “all activities associated with keep-
ing traceability links up to date and consistent” [25]. It is necessary to devote
effort to this task since traceability information is subject to decay as the infor-
mation that is being connected via traceability links changes [21]. Such changes
happen in the normal course of the development of a system. In general, a
traceability model needs to evolve along with the system under development.
Wheneverchangesaremadetothedevelopmentartifacts,thereisachancethat
the traceability links need to be updated as well.
In this chapter, we will focus on automated ways of addressing trace link
maintenancewithNLP.Batotetal.categorizetracelinkmaintenanceaswellas
the related notion of trace link integrity as part of the larger category of trace
management [3]. In their taxonomy, we consider the approaches presented here
as being automated link vetting approaches, even though the vetting process
12 Guo et al.
does not necessarily include the notion of automated fixes of the trace links
being vetted.
Arguably, any practical trace link maintenance approach needs to be able to
deal with a mixture of automatically generated and manually generated trace
links and leave the manually created ones untouched. If this requirement is ful-
filled, even a flawed trace link recovery mechanism can be used to generate an
initial trace matrix which is then refined by manual work from experienced en-
gineers. Once the original matrix has been created, trace link recovery can be
usedtofeedavettingprocess,inwhichatoolsupportstheengineersbymaking
suggestions, which can be manually accepted or rejected (see, e.g., [26]).
This kind of approach would at least address new links that need to be
addedduringdevelopment.Inpractice,thereareanumberofwayshowexisting
traceabilitylinksneedtobeupdatedtoensureconsistency.Asatraceabilitylink
is a semantic relationship between at least two development artifacts, updates
can either a) change which artifacts are related to each other, b) change the
semantics of the relationship, or c) remove the traceability link completely.
Change which artifacts are related to each other. A typical example of a change
that makes it necessary to change the artifacts that are related to each other is
refactoring the system architecture. Such a change might make it necessary to
update the traceability links between components or classes in the architecture
description and the respective source code files. This particular problem has
been addressed in the past by using, e.g., a tool that identifies edit operations
on a UML class diagram and makes the necessary changes in the trace matrix
automatically [22].
Another example of changes in the related artifacts is requirements refine-
ment.Forinstance,alargerrequirementissplitupandapartofitismovedinto
anew,separaterequirement.Traceabilitylinksbetweentheoriginalrequirement
andtheteststhatwereusedtovalidatetheexternalizedpartoftherequirement
should then be updated.
Change the semantics of the relationship. In “semantically rich traceability
spaces” [25], traceability links can carry a number of semantics that describe
the relationships between the artifacts. Such information is often captured in
traceability information models whose design is difficult and can contain ambi-
guities [42]. In particular, they can contain semantic ambiguities. For instance,
a requirement can reference another requirement or refine another require-
ment. It is either up to the engineer to decide which semantics to assign to a
traceability link or the decision might have been made by an automated ap-
proach. In any case, the type of relationship between artifacts can change over
time. Using the example of requirements refinement again, a requirement that
used to reference another one can be rewritten to become a refinement, thus
necessitating updating the semantics.
If a traceability model carries little semantic information, e.g., if the trace-
ability links are implicit and established via naming conventions or IDs, this
scenario is less relevant – since there is no distinction of the different types of
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 13
relationships between artifacts, a link either exists or does not and updates are
performed by removing traceability links.
Remove the traceability link. In other cases, existing traceability links lose their
value and should be removed. One possibility is that a system refactoring has
moved some functionality out of a component and into a different one so that
the trace links connecting the requirements to the functionality in the original
component can be removed. A scenario that also sometimes occurs in practice
is that engineers identify that a link had been created erroneously and that the
artifacts the link connects are not in a relationship.
3.2 Approaches
In general, trace link recovery approaches are far more common in the liter-
ature than maintenance approaches. However, the boundaries between these
approaches are also not sharp: most of the approaches described in Section 2.2
can also be used in trace link maintenance, at least to some degree. As Maro
et al. [25] note, if trace recovery was perfect, the links could be recreated from
scratch every time the artifacts have changed. The current trace matrix is then
simplyreplacedbyanewlygeneratedone.Thiswouldmakeexplicittracemain-
tenance unnecessary. Of course, this way of doing things can incur significant
processingtimes,makesitimpossibletocombineautomatedandmanualtracing,
andgenerallyisonlyadvisableiftheperformanceoftheapproachissufficient.In
practice, none of the automated trace recovery approaches are sufficiently good
to be useful when dealing with real-world, safety-critical systems [27].
RahimiandCleland-Huangproposeanapproachthatcombinestracelinkre-
coveryandtracelinkmaintenance[37].TheirTraceLinkEvolver detectschanges
inthelinkedartifactsandidentifiesaspecificchangescenario.Suchascenarioin-
cludestypicalrefactorings,likemergedclasses,movingmethodsbetweenclasses,
ormakingfunctionalityobsolete.Dependingonthescenario,linksaretheneither
newlycreatedor removed.As changesaredetectedincrementally,thisapproach
doesnot recover the entiretrace matrix atonce, butrather creates andremoves
individual traces. NLP is used specifically to process requirements and source
codetodetermineifnewfunctionalityhasbeenadded.Bothkindsofartifactsare
pre-processed to remove stop words and perform stemming. They are then fed
into a Vector Space Model (VSM) which uses TF-IDF to assign an importance
value to each word in the artifact (see also in Section 2.2). Cosine similarity is
then used to compare requirements and source code. If the similarity is above a
certain threshold and no trace link currently exists, one of the change scenarios
applies and a new link between the requirement and the class or the method is
created.
Millsetal.[28]motivatetheirTRAIL(TRAceabilitylInkcLassifier)approach
by explicitly referring to the challenge of keeping traceability links up-to-date
and of discovering new trace links in the changing development artifacts. The
principle of their approach is to train a machine learning classifier that distin-
guishes true links from false ones in the set of all possible links between the
14 Guo et al.
artifacts. The training of the classifier happens on the existing trace links – the
approach therefore learns from the trace links that have already been identified
as correct. The classifier uses a number of features that are constructed using
NLP approaches. For instance, one feature is constructed using a VSM in which
the importance of the terms in an artifact is stored using TF-IDF and two ar-
tifacts can be compared using cosine similarity. Another example is LDA (see
alsoinSection2.2)inwhichanartifactisrepresentedasavectorofprobabilities
indicatingifatermispresentintheartifact.TheHellingerdistancecanbeused
to compute similarities between artifacts based on this model. In all cases, com-
monpreprocessingstepswereappliedtothetexts,suchasremovingunderscores
or Java keywords and stemming.
Arunthavanathan et al. [1] use a number of NLP tools to translate require-
ments into the structured format used by Stanford CoreNLP7 which differenti-
ates, e.g., noun phrases and verb phrases. This helps to identify design concepts
in the requirements that can then be found in UML class diagrams. The Soft-
ware Artefacts Traceability Analyzer (SAT-Analyzer) normalizes pronouns used
intherequirementstext(e.g.,replacingallinstancesof“they”with“theclient”),
employs stemming and morphological analysis to find the root forms and finally
alsoemploysWordNet8 toidentifysynonyms,hyponyms,andhypernyms.Based
onthestandardizedrepresentationoftherequirement,thetoolthenusesarule-
basedapproachtoidentifyclasses,methods,andattributesintherequirements.
These elements are added to an internal dictionary. Source code in Java and
class diagrams in XMI format are also parsed in a similar way. The constructs
found therein are matched to the internal dictionary. If a match is found, a new
trace link is created.
Updatestoanyoftheartifactsarepropagatedtotheinternaldictionaryand
the identified trace links. This keeps the trace links up-to-date and also means
that the tool creates new trace links if, e.g., a requirement has been updated
and new keywords were introduced that are also found in the source code or
the class diagrams. If the tool detects that an artifact has been deleted, it also
deletes the corresponding trace links.
3.3 Evaluation
Maro et al. [25] describe the notion of a consistency function that maps all
development artifacts and the trace links in the trace matrix to a value between
0 and 1. Such a function can be used to check if the overall consistency of
the traceability links improves or declines during development. A traceability
maintenance approach should thus be “consistency improving” to ensure that
the quality of the trace links does not deteriorate over time [25].
The problem is, of course, to define a suitable consistency function. Maro
et al. provide an example of a consistency function that combines validity (i.e.,
the trace links conform to the defined structure of the traceability information
7 https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/
8 https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 15
model), completeness (percentage of artifacts connected with at least one trace-
ability link), and correctness (the traceability links that do exist are actually
correct). While the first two aspects can be determined automatically, the sec-
ond one is more difficult. In the case of Maro et al. [25], the authors argue that
this step needs to be performed manually.
In practice, the approaches reported in the literature simplify this signifi-
cantly by using the same metrics that are also used to evaluate trace recovery
approaches(cf.Section2.3).Arunthavanathanetal.[1]aswellasMillsetal.[28]
and Rahimi and Cleland-Huang [37] use precision, recall, and F measure. Only
1
the latter justifies why more complex metrics like Lag [15] or MAP [19] were
not chosen: the approach is a binary classifier (should there be a trace link or
not?) and does not create rankings. This is a limitation of all three approaches
describedhereandshowsthatthelimitationsdescribedinSection2.4alsoapply
to trace link maintenance.
Interestingly, Arunthavanathan et al. [1] as well as Mills et al. [28] evaluate
their approaches exactly as trace link recovery approaches are evaluated. They
evaluate exactly one version of a software system and use typical metrics from
TLR. While Rahimi and Cleland-Huang [37] evaluate different versions of the
system, they also use precision and recall. While this gives an overall picture of
thequalityoftheapproach,itdoesnotconsiderthechangesbetweenversions.A
consistency-improvingTLMapproachasdefinedbyMaroetal.[25]wouldleave
correct links in place, add new links that are necessary, and update or remove
existing links as needed. Precision and recall do not measure this as they do not
compare two solutions with each other but only operate on distinct versions of
the artifacts and trace links.
As a further note, not all papers compare to a baseline. Only Rahimi and
Cleland-Huang use VSM and LSI as baselines [37] to show that their approach
is superior to established ones.
3.4 Datasets
Arunthavanathan et al. [1] mention four different datasets, namely “bank re-
quirement”,“orderrequirement”,“hostelmanagementsystem”,and“coachtour
management system” but do not share any information about them. In partic-
ular, they do not describe the number of requirements, classes, etc., and do not
provide any details about how the ground truth has been created. It is not clear
either if any artifact updates were involved in the evaluation. The datasets are
not available to the public either.
Mills et al. [28] use datasets from COEST9, in particular eAnci, EasyClinic,
eTour, iTrust, MODIS, and SMOS. These datasets contain a number of differ-
ent artifact types and also provide a ground truth for the trace links. However,
even though Mills et al. emphasize the importance of maintenance in their pa-
per repeatedly, they also do not evaluate the performance of their approach in
maintenance tasks, but rather only report on the results for trace link recovery.
9 http://sarec.nd.edu/coest/datasets.html
16 Guo et al.
Rahimi and Cleland-Huang [37] use a custom dataset created by having de-
velopers evolve two different applications. They thus create several evolved ver-
sions that contain a number of refactoring for each app which allows them to
effectively evaluate the Trace Link Evolver, a tool they proposed. The ground
truth (i.e., traceability links existed before and after the changes) was created
by the researchers. TLE was then used to detect the changes and to update
the traceability links. TLE’s results were then compared to the ground truth to
calculate precision, recall, and F -measure.
2
In general, it is even more difficult to construct a ground truth for trace link
maintenance than it is for trace link recovery. The reason is that each version
of an app requires its own ground truth. Rahimi and Cleland-Huang manually
constructed this ground truth for the rather large changes performed by the
developers based on an analysis of the source code and a description of the
changes that were also provided by the developers.
However, ideally, each change that a TLM approach would look at is rela-
tively small and localized. Guidelines for developers usually indicate that they
should commit small, individual changes [36]. Analyzing such small changes for
maintenance actions that modify the trace links is a simpler approach. Indeed,
Rathetal.[38]exploitthisfortheirapproachtoaugmentincompletetracelinks.
Likewise, Mukelabai et al. [30] use commits to automate their feature location
approach. A traceability maintenance mechanism could do the same thing – the
constructionofthegroundtruth,namelywhichtracelinksshouldchange,would
then be more localized and easier to manage for each commit.
3.5 Limitations and Concluding Remarks
Many of the limitations of TLR mentioned in Section 2.4 also hold for trace
link maintenance. In terms of explainability, only the approach by Rahimi and
Cleland-Huang provides justifications for changes to the trace matrix – the
change scenarios provide a clear indication of why a trace link was established
or removed. However, all approaches discussed here are unable to differentiate
between different semantic relationships – as discussed in Section 3.3, they all
act as binary classifiers (either there should be a link or there should not) and
are not able to assign more meaningful semantics. In principle, it is possible to
predictthelinktypebyusingmulti-classclassification(cf.Section4.2),butthis
has not been applied to trace link maintenance yet. Finally, as discussed in Sec-
tion 3.4, constructing meaningful datasets for trace link maintenance that cover
several changes of a system and ideally even the entire development lifecycle
while providing a ground truth for each step is a formidable challenge.
Inadditiontothis,tracelinkmaintenancebringsitsown,uniquechallenges:
TLM approaches often do not consider manual changes. The few
trace link recovery approaches described in the literature do not make explicit
accommodations for manual changes to the trace matrix, but instead operate
undertheassumption,thatengineerswillfullyrelyontheautomatedapproach.
In particular, it is not clear if these approaches allow trace links to be protected
from removal or modification or if they allow for the use of the information
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 17
gathered in a vetting process. In practice, however, engineers should be able
to manipulate the trace matrix alongside an automated approach without their
changes being overridden.
TLM approaches often do not change a link, but remove it and
create new links. One of the maintenance operations identified above is to
change a link in terms of which artifacts are connected. The TLM approaches
described here all “update” a link by removing the old link and creating a new
one. This is difficult since trace links can carry additional information– apart
from semantic information, they can carry comments about why they were cre-
ated, who created them, information about their history, and other things. In
particularindomainsinwhichinformationneedstobeauditedandaccountabil-
ity is important, such information cannot be lost (see, e.g., [42]). Updating an
existing link also improves the traceability of the trace matrix itself, especially
if it is versioned appropriately.
4 Other Tasks
The implication of natural language processing techniques on traceability goes
beyond trace link construction and maintenance. Considering concrete contexts
where trace links are used, many other tasks related to traceability can directly
benefit from the advantages of adopting NLP methods. In this section, we in-
troduce two such tasks: trace link explanation and trace link type prediction.
4.1 Trace Link Explanation
Task Specification Tracelinkexplanationisthetaskoffacilitatingtheunder-
standingoftracelinksbyexplainingwhytwoartifactsarelinked.Tracelinksare
often cross two different types of artifacts (e.g., requirements, design document,
sourcecode,etc.).Dependingonthenatureoftheartifacts,thevocabularyused,
andthedomainknowledgeembedded,theconnectionofthetwoartifactstracing
to each other can be obscure. While automated methods described in Section 2
can handle such a gap [12] to a large extent, they are far from perfect. Require-
ment analysts or experts still have to go through the vetting process to confirm
the existence of the links returned by those methods. In such a case, explicitly
explaining the rationales of the trace link is beneficial for them to effectively
evaluatetheautomaticallyretrievedlinks.Forstakeholderswithlimiteddomain
knowledge, such explanations can help them properly interpret and understand
the trace links. Moreover, for safety and security-critical systems where trace-
abilityisrequired,theexplanationoflinkscanalsosupporttheauditingprocess.
The barriers to understanding a trace link can appear at different levels. On
the artifact level, the terminology and acronyms appearing in individual arti-
facts can be unfamiliar to readers, interfering with their understanding of the
semantics of the artifact. For example, to understand the following regulatory
requirement specified by the USA Certification Commission for Health Infor-
mation Technology (CCHIT): “The system shall provide the ability to retrieve,
18 Guo et al.
display, store, and export a HITSP C/48 document”, analysts have to properly
interpret, among others, what “HITSP” stands for (i.e., Healthcare Information
Technology Standards Panel).
Furthermore, on the trace link level, connecting two artifacts often requires
contextualizingthedomainconceptsthatappearedineachartifactandreasoning
theirrelationship.Properlygeneratingtheexplanationateachlevelrequiresnot
only processing the artifacts through language technology but also representing
and locating relevant domain knowledge. The previous requirement is linked to
thefollowingrequirementfromtheUSVeteran’sWorldVistahealthcaresystem:
“The system shall have the capability to capture and store risk, social, and med-
ical factors for each new patient.”. The link can only be understood when the
analyst grasps how the ability to operate on HITSP C/48 document is related
to storing the medical record of the patients.
In sum, two related tasks fall under the scope of trace link explanation.
1. Given an artifact, identify and explain the domain-specific terms appearing
in the artifact.
2. Given a trace link between two artifacts, explain relationship between con-
cepts appearing in both artifacts.
Approaches Given that trace link explanation can be divided into two related
butdistincttasks,approachesforaddressingtracelinkexplanationalsofallinto
two categories, i.e. explaining terms and explaining relations.
Explaining terms The first step for explaining terms is to identify them from
the artifacts. For artifacts written in natural language, syntactic analysis meth-
ods are often used, such as Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging and dependency pars-
ing, to identify the noun phrases that are likely to be domain-specific concepts
and need explanation. The CoreNLP tool 10 by StanfordNLP group is widely
adopted for those tasks.
Many previous works aim at explaining domain-specific concepts in the ar-
tifacts for the purpose of supporting comprehension, mostly relying on external
resources such as Wikipedia [40,32], project glossaries [18], and domain cor-
pus [18].
Structured resources such as Wikipedia, in particular, the knowledge base
built from Wikipedia entries and their connections, can effectively supplement
the information of the artifacts if the knowledge base contains entries of the
relevant concepts. Locating the entry in Wikipedia or similar knowledge bases
that correspond to the terms mentioned in a natural language artifact is often
called wikification. Nassif and Robbilard have performed an in-depth analysis of
theperformanceofexistingwikificationtools,alsoknownaswikifiers,onsoftware
artifacts [31]. For example, using JSI Wikifier,11 one of the wikifiers examined
in this work, the following concept would be identified using the default setting:
10 https://stanfordnlp.github.io/CoreNLP/
11 https://wikifier.org/
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 19
The system shall provide the ability to retrieve, display, store, and export a
HITSP C/48 document.
EachunderlinedtextisannotatedbythewikifierwiththeWikipediaentryin
whichthetermappears.Inthiscase,thepageof“AmericanNationalStandards
Institute” is linked to the term “HITSP”. When the term appears in multiple
possible entries, a ranked list of entries is returned based on the calculation of
confidence (JSI Wikifier uses the pagerank value). Note that the wikification
process itself involves identifying noun phrases in the artifacts and evaluating
the relationship between them and the entries in the knowledge base. They are
well encapsulated within the wikifiers so that the users can use them as a black
box to perform both term identification and explanation.
Therelevanceoftheannotationprovidedbyawikifiercanvarygreatly.Some
of the terms are too general, making the explanation redundant, e.g., “system”
in the previous example. A predefined list can be effective in such cases to filter
frequent but general terms. Liu et al. created such a blacklist by comparing
the general corpus with the domain-specific ones and identifying the overlapped
concepts [18]. Moreover, some project-specific terms might not be mentioned
in the knowledge base at all. In this case, a project glossary can provide more
precise explanations for the target terms. Liu et al., for example, leveraged a
glossary from the WordVista project 12 in which key acronyms and concepts for
this domain are explained.
In cases where the term cannot be found in either the general knowledge
base or the project glossary, online research offers a viable alternative. For
example, Liu et al. suggested that a query following the template “what is
inbody:<concept> in <domain name>” returns consistently relevant results
to build the domain-specific corpus using the Bing search engine [18]. They
then used the syntactic analysis methods mentioned above to find expressions
in the corpus that are likely to be explanations, e.g., in the form of “<concept>
is/are/do something”. To filter out expressions outside the scope of the target
projectdomains,theytrainedabinaryclassifiertoevaluateiftheconceptitself,
the definition, or the context sentence belongs to the target project domain.
Explaining relations Various relationships might appear in a trace link that
can help explain why the link should be established. Decisions have to be made
on what kind of relationship to provide and for what purpose. Liu et al. focused
on the hierarchical or equivalent relations between domain concepts appearing
in two artifacts. This is achieved by first finding the ⟨Subject,Verb,Object⟩
triplet from the domain corpus while confining verbs representing a hierarchical
(e.g., includes) or equivalent (e.g., equals) relationship. A knowledge graph is
then formed by all the identified triplets, with the nodes representing the do-
main concepts and edges indicating their relationship. To explain the links, the
shortest path in the knowledge graph between two concepts from the artifacts
is returned, if it exists. For the example above, the shortest path would include:
⟨HITSPC48,contains,MedicalSummaryDocument⟩,
12 https://tinyurl.com/WorldVistaGlossary
20 Guo et al.
⟨MedicalSummaryDocument,contains,AllergyConcernEntry⟩,
⟨Allergy,isa,Risk⟩
Guo et al. approached link explanation through more extensive syntactic
analysis and a predefined set of heuristics [13]. They proposed a syntactic tem-
plate called Action Frame that is centered around a verb in the artifacts (there-
fore action). Other than the verb, each action frame is characterized by roles
such as agent (i.e., subject of the verb), theme (i.e., object of the verb), etc.
One or more action frames can be extracted from each artifact to represent the
transition of the systems’ states. For example, one action frame can be popu-
lated by analyzing this requirement for the patient-controlled analgesia (PCA)
pump software: “The upstream monitor [Agent] measures drug flow into the
pump and detects [Action] upstream occlusion [Theme].” Then, by applying
the heuristics to the action frames from two artifacts, rationales of the trace
link can be generated. For example, the rationale for the basic rule is for-
mulated as ‘Both artifacts involve’ + G(Agent1, Agent2) + Action1 +
‘ing’ + G(Theme1, Theme2), in which RoleName1 indicates the role extracted
from the source artifact, RoleName2 is the role extracted from the target arti-
fact,andG(RoleName1, RoleName2)inthepatternrepresentsthemoregeneral
conceptbetweenthecontentsinRoleName1andRoleName2asdefinedinthedo-
main knowledge graph. Clearly, generating such an explanation needs not only
a knowledge graph for domain concepts but also a set of heuristics that defines
the action frame mapping rules and rationale generation template.
Evaluation When evaluating the task of trace link explanation, both aspects
ofverificationandvalidationshouldbeconsidered.First,wecareaboutthecov-
erageandaccuracyofthemethodsateachstep.Forexample,researchquestions
can be asked concerning the domain concept identification step, such as how
many concepts are identified from the artifacts, what percentage of the identi-
fiedconceptsaredomain-specific,andhowmanydomainconceptsintheartifacts
are missing. Similar questions can be asked about the concept explanation and
relationship explanation. Given that we seldom have ready-to-use ground truth
data for such information, manual annotation is unavoidable, which might pose
concerns about the quality and size of the evaluation dataset.
Forvalidation,researchersoftenaskquestionssuchaswhetherthegenerated
explanations are useful for analysts for certain tasks. These types of questions
can be answered by designing and conducting user studies with analysts or a
similar population, during which the explanations are presented to them for a
particular context. While the study normally requires more effort to carry out,
often further involving developing prototypes with UI components for the tool,
theycanhelpderiveinsightfuloutcomesabouttheanalystsandhowtheymight
use the trace link explanation in practice [18].
4.2 Link Type Prediction
Task Specification Similar to trace link explanation, link type prediction is
a task that goes one step further from predicting whether a link exists between
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 21
twoartifacts–itaimstoprovidericherinformationaboutthelinks,inparticular,
predicting if the reason for creating the trace links falls into a certain category.
Whenthenotionofsoftwaretraceabilitywasfirstproposed,itwasoftenapplied
to specific artifacts for safety-critical software, such as faults identified from
failure analysis, requirements specifications, test cases, etc. The types of trace
links are normally easy to infer from the types of artifacts. For example, a test
case tests a requirement specification, or a requirement specification mitigates
an identified fault. The link type can be clearly specified through a Traceability
Information Model (TIM) [23]. Given the rise of open source software devel-
opment and their common adoption of modern issue tracking systems such as
GitHub13 and Jira,14 the types of artifacts under consideration are much more
heterogeneous,andthetracelinkstypesarethereforemuchlesswelldefined.For
example, Nicholson and Guo [33] revealed that 12 different labels were assigned
to issues of the three open source projects in Jira, such as bug, tasks, improve-
ment,sub-tasks,newfeatures.Thefrequentlyappearedlinktypesbetweenthose
issues are related to, duplicates, blocks, depends upon, requires, etc. Such practi-
cal usage of trace links between issues calls for a more precise prediction of the
trace links. Consequently, the trace link type prediction task can be specified as
a multi-class classification task – predicting the label from a predefined set of
labels indicating the link type of two artifacts under evaluation.
Approaches Given the availability of large amounts of existing data from is-
sue trackers such as Jira [29], link type prediction is often approached through
learning-based methods. The first step in those methods is to represent the two
involved artifacts as a vector for training the classifier and later making infer-
ences.Eachissueintheissuetrackerischaracterizedbyitstitle,amoredetailed
description and other metadata, such as reporter, created time, and issue type.
Researchers need to decide on what information to use to encode for individual
issues and how. For example, Nicholson and Guo [33] encoded both the tex-
tual data (title and description, using TF-IDF or fastText embeddings trained
by Wikipedia, StackOverflow, or project-specific documents) and the metadata
(issue type, reporter identifier and assignee identifier using one-hot encoding).
Lu¨ders et al. [20], on the other hand, chose to encode issues only using their
title and description (through general BERT model 15) considering those are
universal features across different issue trackers. Then, a pair of artifacts can
be represented as a combination of the features of individual artifacts, with op-
tionally other features on the relations of the two involved artifacts (such as
differences in creation time between the two issues). When using BERT to en-
code the textual content from the pair of artifacts, either the [CLS] token 16 or
13 https://github.com/
14 https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira
15 https://github.com/google-research/bert
16 [CLS] stands for classification and is a special token added at the beginning of
the input sequence. The vector of [CLS] token is considered as approximating the
sequencerepresentationsince[CLS]tokenisusedwhenperformingthenextsentence
22 Guo et al.
averagingoverthesequencecanbeused.Forpredictingthetypeofthelink,ma-
chine learning methods introduced in Section 2.2 are generally applicable to the
vector representation of the artifact pair, such as Logistic Regression, Random
Forest, or Neural Network.
Evaluation While the methods for link type prediction resemble the ones used
for link recovery, additional care is needed when designing the experiment to
evaluate the performance of the methods, considering the characteristics of the
data. First of all, the quality of the dataset needs to be carefully scrutinized
before being used for training or testing the machine learning models. Previous
workshavepointedoutthattheuseoflinklabelsinJiraisinconsistent[33,29,20].
Forexample,multipletermswithslightvariationsareusedaslinklabelsinJira,
such as Depend, Dependency, Dependent, Depends. In such a case, it might be
advisabletounifythoselabels.Ontheotherhand,someofthelabelswithsimilar
meanings might be better left without merging. Considering the label Clone, an
indication of duplication, it might be better to be considered as different from
the label Duplicate since the two labels are often assigned in different contexts.
While Duplicate is assigned by users explicitly after both involved issues are
created, the label clone is automatically created by Jira when its users use the
“clone” feature to create new issues from existing ones. Through a qualitative
labelling process, Montgomery et al. [29] investigated initial data mined from
Jira and created a cleaned dataset with around 1 million issue links.
The second consideration is how to address the class imbalance issue. Natu-
rally occurring labels are heavily skewed towards common types such as Related
to, Duplicate, and Subtasks, etc. The number of instances observed for the mi-
nority classes, such as Cause and Requires, might be insufficient to train the
classifier, which might lead to inferior overall performance. Methods frequently
used to handle class imbalance include class weights and SMOTE [5]. Unfor-
tunately, no decisive improvement can be observed in previous studies when
applying those methods [33,20]. A closely related consideration is what the ap-
propriate metrics are when comparing different methods or methods with dif-
ferent options to configure. Metrics such as macro, micro, and weighted F are
1
all related to aggregating the F measure across all classes. The key difference
1
is in how they consider the class imbalance issue. Macro F considers each class
1
equally – once the F measure is calculated for each class, their average is used
1
to indicate the performance of the classifier. Micro F , on the other hand, con-
1
siderseachinstanceequallyandthereforeignoresthefactorsofimbalanceddata
– the true positives, false negatives and false positives across all classes are first
aggregated, using which F is then calculated. Finally, weighted F calculates
1 1
the class level F first; then, it is averaged while weighing the frequency of label
1
occurrences. The selection of the metrics should be suitable for the assumptions
oftheimportanceofdifferentclassesandtheintendedusecasesoftheclassifier.
prediction (NSP) objective (either the second sentence is the next one in sequence)
during pre-training.
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 23
The last factor is time since it plays a critical role when interpreting how
the methods might perform when deployed in real systems, during which only
historical data is observable and can be used for training the machine learning
models.Thetrainingdatausedintheexperiment,therefore,shouldresemblethe
historicaldatawhendeployed.Themodelsmightbeappliedtomakepredictions
on other historical data, e.g., the links overlooked by developers. In such a case,
a random split of the experimental data into training and testing would be
justifiable. When the dataset is not big enough, cross-validation is often used to
overcome the impact of randomness. In the case when the models need to make
predictions on future events, a timestamp-based data split is more appropriate.
The older experimental data can be used for training, while the newer data can
be used for testing.
5 Summary and Conclusion
As illustrated in Figure 1, traceability covers fundamental activities concerning
the planning and managing of traceability strategies, creating and maintain-
ing links, and supporting the use of links in context. This chapter provides an
overview of how the advances in NLP have helped with some of those activities.
Over the past decades, most has been devoted to the trace link recovery task.
Otheraspects,suchastracelinkmaintenanceandlinktypeprediction,havealso
attracted notable attention. More future progress calls for novel ways to collect
or create high-quality trace datasets that contain information on fine-grained
categories of link types and how they evolve along with the software project. As
hinted by the latest work on Generative AI, the conversational interface backed
by large language models serves as an intuitive way for trace link creation and
explanation, but it is not yet clear how these approaches will scale. Their abil-
ity to integrate project and work context opens new opportunities for designing
automated traceability solutions toward higher levels of relevance. At the same
time, more work is needed on how to design and improve the reliability of the
Generative AI-based methods and systematically evaluate their impact. This
chapter also uncovers the limited progress in using NLP in traceability plan-
ning. Realizing the vision of “ubiquitous traceability” calls for more effort in
supporting early stages of the engineering process and considering traceability
as part of the project priority. NLP methods might help better allocate manual
and automated resources towards more effective traceability solutions.
References
1. Arunthavanathan, A., Shanmugathasan, S., Ratnavel, S., Thiyagarajah, V.,
Perera, I., Meedeniya, D., Balasubramaniam, D.: Support for traceability
management of software artefacts using natural language processing. In:
Moratuwa Engineering Research Conference, MERCon. pp. 18–23. IEEE (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MERCon.2016.7480109
24 Guo et al.
2. Asuncion, H.U., Asuncion, A.U., Taylor, R.N.: Software traceability with topic
modeling. In: Kramer, J., Bishop, J., Devanbu, P.T., Uchitel, S. (eds.) 32nd
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1, ICSE.
pp. 95–104. ACM (2010). https://doi.org/10.1145/1806799.1806817
3. Batot, E.R., G´erard, S., Cabot, J.: A survey-driven feature model for software
traceability approaches. In: Johnsen, E.B., Wimmer, M. (eds.) Fundamental Ap-
proachestoSoftwareEngineering-25thInternationalConference,FASE2022,Held
as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software,
ETAPS. vol. 13241, pp. 23–48. Springer (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-99429-7 2
4. Borg,M.,Runeson,P.,Ardo¨,A.:Recoveringfromadecade:asystematicmapping
of information retrieval approaches to software traceability. Empir. Softw. Eng.
19(6), 1565–1616 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-013-9255-Y
5. Chawla, N.V., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O., Kegelmeyer, W.P.: SMOTE: syn-
thetic minority over-sampling technique. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 16, 321–357 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1613/JAIR.953
6. Cleland-Huang, J., Gotel, O., Hayes, J.H., Ma¨der, P., Zisman, A.: Software
traceability: trends and future directions. In: Herbsleb, J.D., Dwyer, M.B.
(eds.) on Future of Software Engineering, FOSE,. pp. 55–69. ACM (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2593882.2593891
7. Cuddeback, D., Dekhtyar, A., Hayes, J.H.: Automated requirements traceabil-
ity: The study of human analysts. In: 18th IEEE International Requirements
Engineering Conference, RE. pp. 231–240. IEEE Computer Society (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2010.35
8. Dell’Anna, D., Aydemir, F.B., Dalpiaz, F.: Evaluating classifiers in SE research:
the ECSER pipeline and two replication studies. Empir. Softw. Eng. 28(1), 3
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-022-10243-1
9. Devlin,J.,Chang,M.,Lee,K.,Toutanova,K.:BERT:pre-trainingofdeepbidirec-
tionaltransformersforlanguageunderstanding.In:Burstein,J.,Doran,C.,Solorio,
T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
NAACL-HLT,Volume1(LongandShortPapers).pp.4171–4186.Associationfor
Computational Linguistics (2019). https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/N19-1423
10. Falessi, D., Penta, M.D., Canfora, G., Cantone, G.: Estimating the number of
remaininglinksintraceabilityrecovery.Empir.Softw.Eng.22(3),996–1027(2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-016-9460-6
11. Guo,J.,Cheng,J.,Cleland-Huang,J.:Semanticallyenhancedsoftwaretraceability
usingdeeplearningtechniques.In:Uchitel,S.,Orso,A.,Robillard,M.P.(eds.)39th
International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE. pp. 3–14. IEEE / ACM
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2017.9
12. Guo, J., Gibiec, M., Cleland-Huang, J.: Tackling the term-mismatch prob-
lem in automated trace retrieval. Empir. Softw. Eng. 22(3), 1103–1142 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-016-9479-8
13. Guo, J., Monaikul, N., Cleland-Huang, J.: Trace links explained: An automated
approach for generating rationales. In: Zowghi, D., Gervasi, V., Amyot, D. (eds.)
23rdIEEEInternationalRequirementsEngineeringConference,RE.pp.202–207.
IEEE Computer Society (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2015.7320423
14. Hayes, J.H., Dekhtyar, A., Sundaram, S.K.: Advancing candidate link generation
forrequirementstracing:Thestudyofmethods.IEEETrans.SoftwareEng.32(1),
4–19 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2006.3
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 25
15. Hayes, J.H., Dekhtyar, A., Sundaram, S.K.: Advancing candidate link generation
forrequirementstracing:Thestudyofmethods.IEEETrans.SoftwareEng.32(1),
4–19 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2006.3
16. Laliberte, C.D., Giachetti, R.E., Kolsch, M.: Evaluation of natural lan-
guage processing for requirements traceability. In: 17th Annual Sys-
tem of Systems Engineering Conference, SOSE. pp. 21–26. IEEE (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/SOSE55472.2022.9812649
17. Lin, J., Liu, Y., Zeng, Q., Jiang, M., Cleland-Huang, J.: Traceability trans-
formed: Generating more accurate links with pre-trained BERT models. In: 43rd
IEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering,ICSE.pp.324–335.
IEEE (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00040
18. Liu, Y., Lin, J., Anuyah, O., Metoyer, R.A., Cleland-Huang, J.: Generating
and visualizing trace link explanations. In: 44th IEEE/ACM 44th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE. pp. 1033–1044. ACM (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510003.3510129
19. Lohar, S., Amornborvornwong, S., Zisman, A., Cleland-Huang, J.: Improving
trace accuracy through data-driven configuration and composition of tracing fea-
tures. In: Meyer, B., Baresi, L., Mezini, M. (eds.) Joint Meeting of the Euro-
pean Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on
the Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE. pp. 378–388. ACM (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2491411.2491432
20. Lu¨ders, C.M., Pietz, T., Maalej, W.: Automated detection of typed links in issue
trackers. In: 30th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference, RE.
pp. 26–38. IEEE (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/RE54965.2022.00010
21. M¨ader,P.,Gotel,O.:Towardsautomatedtraceabilitymaintenance.J.Syst.Softw.
85(10), 2205–2227 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JSS.2011.10.023
22. M¨ader, P., Gotel, O., Philippow, I.: Enabling automated traceability mainte-
nance through the upkeep of traceability relations. In: Paige, R.F., Hartman, A.,
Rensink, A. (eds.) Model Driven Architecture - Foundations and Applications,
5th European Conference, ECMDA-FA. vol. 5562, pp. 174–189. Springer (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02674-4 13
23. M¨ader, P., Jones, P.L., Zhang, Y., Cleland-Huang, J.: Strategic trace-
ability for safety-critical projects. IEEE Softw. 30(3), 58–66 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2013.60
24. Marcus, A., Maletic, J.I.: Recovering documentation-to-source-code traceability
linksusinglatentsemanticindexing.In:Clarke,L.A.,Dillon,L.,Tichy,W.F.(eds.)
25thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering,ICSE.pp.125–137.IEEE
Computer Society (2003). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2003.1201194
25. Maro,S.,Anjorin,A.,Wohlrab,R.,Stegh¨ofer,J.:Traceabilitymaintenance:factors
and guidelines. In: Lo, D., Apel, S., Khurshid, S. (eds.) 31st IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE. pp. 414–425. ACM
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2970276.2970314
26. Maro, S., Stegho¨fer, J., Hayes, J.H., Cleland-Huang, J., Staron, M.: Vetting au-
tomatically generated trace links: What information is useful to human analysts?
In: Ruhe, G., Maalej, W., Amyot, D. (eds.) 26th IEEE International Require-
ments Engineering Conference, RE. pp. 52–63. IEEE Computer Society (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE.2018.00-52
27. Maro, S., Stegho¨fer, J., Staron, M.: Software traceability in the automo-
tive domain: Challenges and solutions. J. Syst. Softw. 141, 85–110 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JSS.2018.03.060
26 Guo et al.
28. Mills, C., Escobar-Avila, J., Haiduc, S.: Automatic traceability maintenance via
machine learning classification. In: IEEE International Conference on Software
MaintenanceandEvolution,ICSME.pp.369–380.IEEEComputerSociety(2018).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSME.2018.00045
29. Montgomery, L., Lu¨ders, C.M., Maalej, W.: An alternative issue tracking
dataset of public jira repositories. In: 19th IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR. pp. 73–77. ACM (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528486
30. Mukelabai,M.,Hermann,K.,Berger,T.,Stegho¨fer,J.:Featracer:Locatingfeatures
throughassistedtraceability.IEEETrans.SoftwareEng.49(12),5060–5083(2023).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2023.3324719
31. Nassif,M.,Robillard,M.P.:Wikifyingsoftwareartifacts.Empir.Softw.Eng.26(2),
31 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-020-09918-4
32. Nassif, M., Robillard, M.P.: Identifying concepts in software
projects. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 49(7), 3660–3674 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2023.3265855
33. Nicholson,A.,Guo,J.L.C.:Issuelinklabelrecoveryandpredictionforopensource
software.In:Yue,T.,Mirakhorli,M.(eds.)29thIEEEInternationalRequirements
Engineering Conference Workshops, RE Workshops. pp. 126–135. IEEE (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/REW53955.2021.00024
34. Oliveto,R.,Gethers,M.,Poshyvanyk,D.,Lucia,A.D.:Ontheequivalenceofinfor-
mation retrieval methods for automated traceability link recovery. In: 18th IEEE
International Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC. pp. 68–71. IEEE
Computer Society (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPC.2010.20
35. Pauzi, Z., Capiluppi, A.: Applications of natural language processing in software
traceability: A systematic mapping study. J. Syst. Softw. 198, 111616 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JSS.2023.111616
36. Purushothaman, R., Perry, D.E.: Toward understanding the rhetoric of small
source code changes. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 31(6), 511–526 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2005.74
37. Rahimi, M., Cleland-Huang, J.: Evolving software trace links between re-
quirements and source code. Empir. Softw. Eng. 23(4), 2198–2231 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10664-017-9561-X
38. Rath, M., Rendall, J., Guo, J.L.C., Cleland-Huang, J., Ma¨der, P.: Trace-
ability in the wild: automatically augmenting incomplete trace links. In:
Chaudron, M., Crnkovic, I., Chechik, M., Harman, M. (eds.) 40th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE. pp. 834–845. ACM (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3180155.3180207
39. Rodriguez, A.D., Dearstyne, K.R., Cleland-Huang, J.: Prompts matter: Insights
and strategies for prompt engineering in automated software traceability. In:
Schneider,K.,Dalpiaz,F.,Horkoff,J.(eds.)31stIEEEInternationalRequirements
Engineering Conference Workshops, RE Workshops. pp. 455–464. IEEE (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1109/REW57809.2023.00087
40. Shang, J., Liu, J., Jiang, M., Ren, X., Voss, C.R., Han, J.: Automated phrase
mining from massive text corpora. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 30(10), 1825–
1837 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2018.2812203
41. Shin,Y.,Hayes,J.H.,Cleland-Huang,J.:Guidelinesforbenchmarkingautomated
software traceability techniques. In: Ma¨der, P., Oliveto, R. (eds.) 8th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Software and Systems Traceability, SST. pp. 61–67.
IEEE Computer Society (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/SST.2015.13
Natural Language Processing for Requirements Traceability 27
42. Stegho¨fer, J., Koopmann, B., Becker, J.S., To¨rnlund, M., Ibrahim, Y.,
Mohamad, M.: Design decisions in the construction of traceability in-
formation models for safe automotive systems. In: 29th IEEE Interna-
tional Requirements Engineering Conference, RE. pp. 185–196. IEEE (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE51729.2021.00024
43. Vogelsang,A.,Fischbach,J.:Usinglargelanguagemodelsfornaturallanguagepro-
cessing tasks in requirements engineering: A systematic guideline. In: Ferrari, A.,
Deshpande,G.(eds.)HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessingforRequirements
Engineering. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2024)
44. Winkler, J., Vogelsang, A.: Automatic classification of requirements based
on convolutional neural networks. In: 24th IEEE International Requirements
Engineering Conference, RE. pp. 39–45. IEEE Computer Society (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1109/REW.2016.021
45. Zhao, L., Alhoshan, W., Ferrari, A., Letsholo, K.J., Ajagbe, M.A., Chioasca, E.,
Batista-Navarro, R.T.: Natural language processing for requirements engineer-
ing: A systematic mapping study. ACM Comput. Surv. 54(3), 55:1–55:41 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3444689
