Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Overcoming Low-Utility Facets for
Complex Answer Retrieval
Sean MacAvaney · Andrew Yates ·
Arman Cohan · Luca Soldaini · Kai
Hui · Nazli Goharian · Ophir Frieder
Received:date/Accepted:date
Abstract Many questions cannot be answered simply; their answers must
include numerous nuanced details and additional context. Complex Answer
Retrieval(CAR)istheretrievalofanswerstosuchquestions.Intheirsimplest
form, these questions are constructed from a topic entity (e.g., ‘cheese’) and
a facet (e.g., ‘health effects’). While topic matching has been thoroughly ex-
plored, we observe that some facets use general language that is unlikely to
appear verbatim in answers. We call these low-utility facets. In this work, we
present an approach to CAR that identifies and addresses low-utility facets.
We propose two estimators of facet utility. These include exploiting the hier-
archical structure of CAR queries and using facet frequency information from
training data. To improve the retrieval performance on low-utility headings,
wealsoincludeentitysimilarityscoresusingknowledgegraphembeddings.We
apply our approaches to a leading neural ranking technique, and evaluate us-
ing the TREC CAR dataset. We find that our approach perform significantly
This is an extended version of “Characterizing Question Facets for Complex Answer Re-
trieval.TREC2018.” [18]Extensionsincludetheuseofknowledgegraphstoinformmodel,
andanextensiveanalysis.
S.MacAvaney
InformationRetrievalLab,GeorgetownUniversity
3700OStNW,Washington,DC20057,UnitedStates
Tel.:+1-202-687-5874
Fax:+1-202-687-7822
E-mail:sean@ir.cs.georgetown.edu
A.Yates
MaxPlanckInstituteforInformatics
A.Cohan·L.Soldaini
InformationRetrievalLab,GeorgetownUniversity
K.Hui
SAPSE
N.Goharian·O.Frieder
InformationRetrievalLab,GeorgetownUniversity
8102
voN
12
]RI.sc[
1v27780.1181:viXra
2 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
better than the unmodified neural ranker and other leading CAR techniques.
We also provide a detailed analysis of our results, and verify that low-utility
facets are indeed more difficult to match, and that our approach improves the
performance for these difficult queries.
Keywords complex answer retrieval · knowledge graphs · neural information
retrieval · reranking
1 Introduction
It is common to use search technologies to find answers to questions. While
considerable work has been done on questions that have simple factoid an-
swers, less focus has been given to questions with complex answers. Here we
define complex answers as answers that include many details or additional
context (making complex answers different than factoid answers). Complex
Answer Retrieval (CAR) is the process of finding answers to questions that
have complex answers [8]. Note that CAR questions are not necessarily com-
plex. A question as simple as ‘Is cheese healthy?’ requires a complex answer:
a detailed and nuanced description of positive and negative health effects of
cheese consumption is required to satisfy the information need. In contrast,
a question such as ‘How much Mozzarella cheese do I need to eat to satisfy
my daily requirement of calcium?’ isacomplexquestionwithasimplefactoid
answer.1
Since complex answers include details and context, they often are formu-
lated as paragraphs of text. Thus, CAR is framed as paragraph retrieval for
a question that has a complex answer. We propose two complementary ap-
proaches to identify question facts that are difficult to match, and one knowl-
edgegraph-basedapproachtoassistinthematchingofquestionswithdifficult
facets. Due to prior showing that neural models are more effective for CAR
than traditional IR techniques [22], we build our approaches into a leading
neural ranker to validate our methods.
CAR queries can be broken down into two components: the topic and
facet. The topic is the main entity of the question. For the query ‘Is cheese
healthy?’, the topic is the entity ‘Cheese’ (see Figure 1). All answers to the
questionmustbeaboutthisentity,otherwisetheanswerisnotvalid.Thefacet
is the particular detail about which the question inquires. In the example, the
facet can be described as ‘Health effects’. For an answer to be considered
valid to the question, it must refer to health effects of cheese—information
such as nutrition, health risks, etc. These answers can come from multiple
sources. For instance, an article about cardiovascular disease may claim that
diets containing foods such as cheese that are high in saturated fat increase
one’s risk of heart disease (Answer 2 in Figure 1). Such a paragraph would
be valuable to include in a complete answer because it contains contextual
1 Thisquestioniscomplexbecauseitinvolvesadvancedreasoningthatgoesbeyondwhat
istypicallycapturedbyaknowledgegraph.
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 3
information about why cheese consumption can increase one’s risk of heart
disease. Thus, it makes sense to frame CAR as retrieval of paragraphs of text
from authoritative sources given a topic and facet. CAR queries with various
factsaboutasingletopiccanbecombinedtoproduceadetailedarticleabout
a topic.
A straightforward approach for CAR is to simply use an existing IR tech-
nique as-is, concatenating the topic and facet information to build the query.
However, such an approach is limited by several factors specific to CAR. We
observe that facets are not necessarily mentioned verbatim in relevant para-
graphs. In Figure 1, the relevant answers (1-3) never include ‘health’ because
the context is clear from the other entities mentioned in the answer. On the
other hand, non-relevant answers sometimes do include the facet term (e.g.,
answer 4). An effective CAR engine needs to account for this. Not all facets
exhibitthisgeneralbehavior.Let’sconsideranotherquery:“What is the effect
of curdling in cheese production?” (topic: cheese, facet: curdling). Since ‘cur-
dling’isnotageneral-languageterm,relevantanswersprobablyneedtousethe
term itself; related entity mentions are probably inadequate and would result
inconfusingtext.Werefertothisdistinctionasfacetutility:high-utilityfacets
use language that is specific to the topic and can be found directly in relevant
answers (e.g., ‘curdling’), whereas low-utility facets use general language and
requires additional domain knowledge to identify relevant paragraphs (e.g.,
‘health effects’).
Given these observations, we propose a two-pronged approach to CAR.
First, we attempt to predict facet utility. For this, we use both structural
information aboutthequery itself, and corpus statistics about how frequently
facets are used. Then, to better accommodate low-utility facets, we utilize
entitymentionsinthecandidateanswer.Tothisend,weconstructaknowledge
graphembeddingsusingatrainingcorpus,andmeasuredistancesbetweenthe
Question: Is cheese healthy?
Topic: Cheese
Facet: Health effects
Answer 1: Although nutrient levels vary by type of cheese, most cheese are a
rich source of calcium, protein, and sodium. Because the primary
ingredient of cheese is milk, most of most of the nutritional...
Answer 2: Consumption of foods that are high in saturated fat such as cheese
are linked with an increase risk of cardiovascular disease.
This is due to adverse +underline[effects] to blood lipids and circulating...
Answer 3: Cheese has the potential for promoting the growth of Listeria
bacteria. This can cause serious infection in an infant and pregnant
woman and can be transmitted to her infant in utero or after...
Answer 4: Wisconsin is known as "America’s Dairyland" because it is one of
the nation’s leading dairy producers, particularly famous for its
cheese. Manufacturing, health care, information technology, and...
Fig. 1 Hypothetical CAR query with three relevant answers (1-3) and one non-relevant
answer(4).Termmatchesfromthetopicandfacetareunderlined.
4 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
topic entity and the entity mentions. We incorporate both the facet utility
estimatorsandtheentityscoresintoaneuralrankingmodel,andusethemodel
to retrieve complex answers. These approaches yield significant improvements
over the unmodified neural ranker, and up to 26% improvement over the next
bestapproach.Wethenprovideadetailedanalysisofourresults,whichshows
that, indeed, low-utility facets are indeed more difficult to match, and that
our approach improves these results. As one of the first comprehensive works
on CAR, we expect these insights to guide future work in CAR.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 Complex Answer Retrieval
Complex answer retrieval is a new area of research in IR. In 2017, the TREC
conference ran a new shared task focused on CAR [8]. The goal of this task is
to rank answer paragraphs corresponding to a complex question. The shared
task frames CAR in terms of Wikipedia content generation. This is appro-
priate because the editorial guidelines and strong role of moderators makes
Wikipedia an authoritative source of information [10]. Paragraphs from arti-
clesmeetingtopiccriteria2areselectedasasourceofanswersforretrieval.The
taskgoesonestepfartherbyassertingthatWikipediaisalsoagoodsourceof
CAR queries and relevance judgments. CAR queries are formed from article
titles (the query topic, an entity), and headings (query facets of that partic-
ular topic). Furthermore, paragraphs found under each heading are treated
as “automatically” relevant to that particular topic, yielding a large amount
of training data [7]. This makes it practical to train data-hungry neural IR
models for CAR. Figure 2 shows an article’s heading hierarchy, including the
question topic and an example facet.
Due to the hierarchal nature of headings in Wikipedia, CAR queries in-
clude multiple headings. This is important to provide adequate context for
the answers. For instance, in Figure 2, heading 7.3 refers specially to the pas-
teurization of cheese as it relates to nutrition and health. For simplicity, we
treat the article title as the first element in a list of headings that represents
each query. Thus, a CAR query is a sequence of headings. In the remainder
of this manuscript, we use ‘»’ to separate the heading components of a query.
The root heading is the title and represents the topic entity of the query. The
leaf heading represents the most specific topic; we call this the main heading.
Intermediate headings are any headings between the title and main heading
provide context for the main heading. Table 1 provides example queries using
this terminology. Note that a given query does not necessarily have any inter-
mediate headings, and that a main heading in one query (Cheese » Nutrition
and health) can appear as an intermediate heading in another query (Cheese
» Nutrition and health » Pasteurization).
2 E.g., templates, talk pages, portals, lists, references, and pages representing people,
organizations,music,books,andothersarediscarded[8].
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 5
topic entity (title)
facet (heading)
Fig. 2 Headings found in the Wikipedia article Cheese, including labels for the question
“Is cheese healthy?”.Adaptedfromhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheese.
Table1 ExampleCARqueriesfromWikipediabyheadingposition.Somequerieshaveno
intermediateheadings.
Title IntermediateHeading(s) MainHeading
Cheese » (none) » Nutritionandhealth
Greenseaturtle » Ecologyandbehavior » Lifecycle
HistoryoftheUnitedStates » 20thCentury » Imperialism
Disturbance(ecology) » (none) » Cyclicdisturbance
Medicaltourism » Destinations»Europe » Finland
Existing work in CAR is relatively limited. Prior to TREC, Nanni et al.
[22]investigatedbaselineapproachesusingtheautomaticrelevancejudgments
(assumingonlyparagraphsfoundunderaheadingarerelevanttothatquery).
Their approaches include BM25, cosine similarity (both with TF-IDF vectors
andwordembeddings),abaselinelearning-to-rankapproach,queryexpansion,
and a deep neural model. They found that the deep neural model Duet [21]
outperforms the others.
The 2017 TREC CAR task inspired several new approaches to CAR. In
this work, we extend our submission to TREC and some follow-up analy-
sis [17, 18]. Another top-performing submission uses a Sequential Dependence
Model (SDM [20]) for answer retrieval [15]. They modified the SDM for CAR
by considering ordered ngrams that occur within an individual heading com-
ponent, and unordered ngrams to terms in different headings. This results
in a bias toward matching partial phrases that appear in individual head-
ings, and reduces processing time for long queries. Another approach uses
a Siamese attention network [19]. Features incorporated into this network
include abbreviated entity names and lead paragraph entity mentions from
DBPedia [1]. Yet another approach uses reinforcement learning query refor-
mulation for CAR [25, 24]. The query reformulation step helps the model add
terms that make up for low-utility facets. Our approach differs from these
6 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
by (1) explicitly modeling facet utility to predict which headings are unlikely
to appear in relevant documents, and (2) incorporating contextualized entity
relatedness measures to improve performance on low-utility facets.
2.2 Neural IR Models
Recent advances in neural IR have produced promising results in the ad-hoc
domain, making them a potentially useful tool for CAR ranking. Early work
on neural IR models focused on building dense representations of texts that
are capable of being compared to measure relevance (e.g., Deep Structured
SemanticModel(DSSM)[11]).Theserepresentation-focused methodsareakin
to traditional vector space model approaches. While scalable, representation-
focused methods suffer from loss of term locality information, making certain
types of query term matching difficult.
Morerecently,workhasshiftedtointeraction-focused methodsthatmodel
how query terms appear in relevant documents directly, i.e. what patterns of
querytermsaretypicalinrelevantdocuments.Theseapproachestypicallyuse
atwo-phaseapproach(seeFigure3a).Thefirstphasefindstermmatchesfora
query-document pair, often using a convolutional neural network (CNN) and
result pooling. The CNN often iterates over a query-document similarity ma-
trix of pretrained word embedding cosine similarities. The second phase com-
bines the results for each query term using, for instance, a dense feedforward
network.Thecombinationresultsinarelevancescoreforthequery-document
pair, which is then used for ranking. For instance, the prominent PACRR
model [12] implements the matching layer with a CNN that is max pooled
over filters, then k-max pooled over query terms to pick out the most salient
signals. Then,the results arecombinedwith adense combination phase. Gen-
erally, these neural models have been shown to be competitive with conven-
tionalrankingtechniquesduetotheirabilitytolearnmatchingpatterns(e.g.,
bigrams,trigrams,skipgrams)fromthetrainingdata,andcombinetheresults
in a meaningful way. Other prominent interaction-focused architectures in-
cludeDRMM[9],MatchPyramid[26],K-NRM[34],Duet[21],DeepRank[27],
Conv-KNRM [4], and Co-PACRR [13]. In this work, we choose to modify a
neural ranking architecture because preliminary work has shown them to be
more effective than conventional approaches out-of-the-box [22] and they can
easilyincorporatenewtechniquesandinformationspecifictothistask.Specif-
ically, by default no rankers consider facet utility, and in this work we show
how this can be incorporated into a neural ranking model.
2.3 Wikipedia and Knowledge Graphs
Sinceknowledgegraphsencodewhichentitiesarerelatedtooneanother,they
may be valuable when identifying paragraphs with low-utility facets. There
have been many efforts to organize Wikipedia information into a knowledge
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 7
d0
q0
q2
q3
q4 q5 q6
q7
q8
q9
...
document
query
d1d2d3 dn
eltit
.retni
niam
d0
q0
q2
q3
q4 matching q5 (e.g. CNN) q6
q7
q8
q9
...
document
query
d1d2d3 dn
eltit
.retni
niam
contextual
vectors
c ( o e m .g. b d in e a n t s io e) n rel. score ( m e. a g t . c C h N in N g ) + c ( o e m .g. b d in e a n t s io e) n rel. score
(a) general neural ranker (b) contextual vectors
d0
q0
q2 q3
q4 q5 q6
q7 q8
q9
...
document
d1d2d3 dn
eltit
.retni
niam
query d0
matching q0 (e.g. CNN) q2
q3
matching combination rel. score q4 matching (e.g. CNN) (e.g. dense) q5 (e.g. CNN) q6
q7 matching q8
(e.g. CNN) q9
(c) heading independence
...
document
query
d1d2d3 dn
eltit
.retni
niam
doc. entities
e0
rel. score combination (e.g. dense)
(d) knowledge graph scores
... e1e2e3 en
Fig. 3 (a)Generalrankingarchitecture,withmatchingandcombinationphases(unmodi-
fied).(b)Modifiedarchitecture,includingcontextualvectorsforcombination.(c)Modified
architecture,splittingforheadingindependence.(d)Modifiedarchitecture,includingknowl-
edgegraphscoresinthecombinationlayer.
graph. Prominent efforts have been the DBPedia [1] and Freebase [2]. Re-
searchershavefoundthatqueryexpansionusingknowledgebasescanimprove
ad-hoc retrieval [6, 33]. Others have investigated how to include knowledge
graph features directly in learning-to-rank approaches [29]. Other efforts have
beeninhowtotrainembeddingsforentitiesandrelationsinknowledgegraphs.
Prominent approaches include translational embeddings (TransE) [3], trans-
lational hyperplane embeddings (TransH) [32], and holographic embeddings
(HolE) [23]. Knowledge graphs have also been employed extensively for gen-
eral question answering tasks [35, 30]. In this work, we observe that entity
similarityactasasignalforanswersthatareotherwisedifficulttomatch(i.e.,
whenfacetsarelow-utility).WebuildaknowledgegraphfromWikipediaarti-
clesusingentitymentionsandheadinglabels.Wethentrainembeddings,and
use embedding similarities when ranking answers.
3 Method
As mentioned in Section 2, complex answer retrieval (CAR) is a new IR task
focused on retrieving complex answers to questions that include a topic and
facet. Paragraphs from authoritative resources (e.g., Wikipedia) are consid-
eredpartialanswersforthesequestions.Identifyingandovercominglow-utility
8 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
facets is a central challenge to CAR [17]. Here, we propose approaches based
on the Wikipedia-focused CAR problem:
– High-utility facets. We find that high-utility facets correspond to headings
that relate to specific details of an article’s topic: topical headings. Thus,
a given topical heading is unlikely to appear in most articles. However,
we predict that terms found in topical headings are more likely to appear
in relevant paragraphs because people are less likely to have the existing
knowledge to determine meaning from the mentioned entities. Since the
title of an article is the article’s topic, it is necessarily topical.
– Low-utility facets. We identify that low-utility facets often correspond to
structuralheadingsinWikipedia.Theseheadingsprovidecoherenceacross
articles by enforcing a standard document structure. As a result, these
headingsoccurfrequently.Furthermore,theyoftenappearasintermediate
headingsbyorganizingtopicalheadingsbelowthem.Sincetheterminology
is necessarily more general, we predict that terms in structural headings
are less likely to appear in relevant paragraphs because readers can figure
out the context by related entities. Thus, we propose including additional
entity similarity information to accommodate these cases.
Recall that an interaction-focused neural ranker (Figure 3a) involves two
phases:amatchingphasethatidentifiesplacesinthedocumentinwhichquery
termsareused(e.g.,convolution),andacombinationphaseinwhichthescores
for each query term are combined to produce a final relevance score (e.g.,
dense). In the remainder of this section, we present two approaches to inform
an arbitrary interaction-focused neural ranker of facet utility (Section 3.1-3.2,
Figure 3b-c), and one approach to include entity similarity signals to inform
the model of relevance for low-utility facets using knowledge base embedding
similarity scores (Section 3.3, Figure 3d). Finally, we describe our implemen-
tation strategy for a concrete neural ranker (PACRR, Section 3.4).
3.1 Contextual vectors
Manyinformationretrievalapproachesusethesimple(yetpowerful)termIDF
value as a signal for query term importance. Neural models incorporate this
signal, too. For instance, DRMM [9] and PACRR [12] use an IDF vector in
the combination phase. We generalize this approach by allowing an arbitrary
number of contextual vectors to be included in the model alongside term in-
teraction signals (Figure 3b). Here, we use contextual vectors to provide an
estimationoffacetutility,understandingthatthemodelscanlearnhowtouse
these values when making relevance judgments. We propose two such estima-
tors: heading position (HP) and heading frequency (HF).
Headingposition RecallthatCARqueriesconsistofmultiplecomponents:the
topic and facet. When framed as Wikipedia content generation, CAR queries
are broken down further into a list of sub-queries, where the first represents
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 9
Table2 Samplecontextualvectorsfor“greenseaturtle»ecologyandbehavior»lifecycle”.
green sea turtle ecology and behavior life cycle
position_title 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
position_inter 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0
position_main 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
heading_frequency 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3
the topic, followed by intermediate headings and the main heading. When
estimating heading utility, the position of the heading in the list intuitively
providesasignalofheadingutility.Forinstance,thetitleisnecessarilytopical;
it is the topic. Furthermore, any intermediate headings are likely structural
because they provide categorizations for the main heading. Finally, the main
heading may be either topical or structural; its position inherently tells the
model nothing about whether or not to expect the term to appear. Thus,
we encode three vectors to encode query term position information: one that
indicates if the term exists in the title, and intermediate heading, or the main
heading. An example of these vectors is given in Table 2.
The benefits of including heading position information can extend beyond
simplydistinguishingwhetheratermislikelyinatopicalorstructuralheading.
Forinstance,thetopicofaquestionmaybeabbreviatedinrelevantparagraphs
toavoidexcessiverepetition.Byincludingheadingpositioninformationinthis
way,themodelcandistinguishwhencertainmatchingpatternsareimportant
to capture.
Heading frequency Another possible estimator of heading utility is the fre-
quency that a heading appears in a sufficiently representative dataset. For in-
stance, because structural headings such as “Nutrition and health” are general
and can accommodate a variety of topics, you would expect to find the head-
ing in many food-related articles. Indeed, the heading appears in Wikipedia
articlessuchasCheese,Beef,Raisin,andothers.Ontheotherhand,onewould
expect topical headings to use less general language, and thus be less likely to
appear in other articles. For instance the heading ‘After the Acts of Union of
1707’ only appears in the article ‘United Kingdom’.
To represent this value, we use the document frequency of each head-
ing: the heading frequency. Thus, frequent headings (e.g., ‘History’) have a
large heading frequency value, and infrequent headings (e.g., ‘After the Acts
of Union of 1707’) have a low value. For heading matching, we require a com-
plete, case-insensitive match of the text. Thus, ‘Health effects’ and ‘Health
Effects’ are considered the same heading (capitalization), but not ‘Health ef-
fects’ and ‘Health’ (substring) or ‘Health affects’ (typographical error). To
group similarly-frequent headings together, we stratify the heading frequency
value when used as a contextual vector in a range of [0,3]. In pilot studies, we
foundeffectivebreakpointstobethe60thpercentile(approximatelythecutoff
for headings that only appear a few times, such as Red Hot Chili Peppers),
10 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
90th percentile (approximately the cutoff of moderately frequent headings,
such as Finland), and 99th percentile (approximately the cutoff of frequent
headings,suchasFamily and personal life).Anexampleofthisvectorisgiven
in Table 2.
When the model encounters the heading frequency value, we expect it to
learn to value high-frequency headings less than low-frequency headings (i.e.,
assignanegativeweight).ThisresultsinsimilarbehaviortoIDF,butwiththe
importantdistinctionthatitoperatesoverentireheadings,ratherthanterms.
For instance, most terms in ‘After the Acts of Union of 1707’ have a low IDF
(i.e., they appear frequently), but as a whole heading, it appears infrequently
and is likely important to match.
Combining contextual vectors The two contextual vectors capture different
notions of heading utility. Heading position contextual vectors are able to
discriminate otherwise identical headings based on where they appear in the
query.Thiscanbevaluableinsomesituations:forinstance,‘Imperialism’and
‘Finland’ in Table 1 appear as main headings, but they could also appear as
the topic of other queries. Heading frequency contextual vectors treat head-
ings with the same text identically, regardless of their position in the query.
However,theirpowercomesfrominformingthemodelaboutthenatureofthe
specific heading, and can help identify the utility of main headings (which are
otherwise ambiguous), or headings that do not match the typical characteris-
tics in other heading positions. By including both vectors, the model should
beabletolearnabettersenseofheadingutilitybycombiningthetwonotions.
3.2 Heading independence
Although contextual vectors can help inform a trained ranker about which
headings are structural and topical, they cannot directly affect which types
of interactions are identified and how these interactions are scored because
this occurs earlier in the pipeline of the neural model considered (matching
phase). We hypothesize that heading utility can actually affect which signals
are important. For instance, a low-utility structural heading might be more
tolerant to weak term similarities (i.e., ‘colonial’ or ‘ancient’ might be accept-
ablematchesfor‘History’),orahigh-utilitytopicalheadingmighthavestricter
requirements for maintaining the order of terms. Thus, we propose a general
approach to modify a neural ranking architecture to adjust matching based
on heading utility: heading independence.
Heading independence involves splitting the matching phase of a neural
ranker into multiple segments, each responsible for processing a segment of
the query. Here, we split the query by heading position: title, intermediate,
and main headings (see Figure 3c). The processing of each heading position is
independent of the others, so a different set of parameters can be learned for
eachcomponent.Theresultsofthematchinglayersarethenconcatenatedand
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 11
senttothecombinationlayeroftheunmodifiedmodel(e.g.,adenselayer)for
the calculation of the final relevance score.
This approach makes intuitive sense because one would expect the title to
interact differently in the document than a structural or topical heading. For
instance, abbreviated versions of the topic are often used to improve readabil-
ity. Furthermore, this approach enforces alignment of headings during com-
bination (see Figure 4). When all query terms are simply concatenated, the
alignment of each query position will change among queries due to differences
inquerylength.Thus,themodelwillneedtolearnandaccommodatemultiple
tendencies in a wider variety of positions of the query, rather in just certain
areas.
3.3 Knowledge graph
Although interaction-focused neural rankers often employ word embedding
similarities, word embeddings do not always capture similarities within con-
texts. This results in individual term being close to many topically-similar
terms [14]. Within the context of CAR, we are only concerned with topics
that are similar given a particular context (i.e., the question facet). Further-
more,weknowthatthemostsalientcontextualinformationcomesfromentity
mentions. Since article titles also correspond to entities, and headings can be
considered the context, we use the following approach employing knowledge
graph embeddings.
Before we can train knowledge graph embeddings, we must have a knowl-
edgegraph.SincetheevaluationtopicsweusecomefromWikipedia,wecannot
use a freely-available knowledge graph based on all of Wikipedia data (e.g.,
Freebase or DBPedia)—this could artificially improve results by including in-
formationfromtherelevantparagraphsthemselves.3 Instead,weconstructour
own knowledge graph from the available CAR training data. Our approach is
based on the observation made by WikiLinks [31]: a knowledge graph can be
constructed using links in Wikipeida articles between the article’s entity and
3 We also cannot remove the evaluation topics when training the graph because that
defeatsthepurpose;withouttargetentitiesencodedintheembeddings,thereisnowayto
findsimilarentitieswhenranking.
Q1: Cheese (H1) > Nutrition (H3) and (H3) health (H3)
Q2: Medical (H1) tourism (H1) > Destinations (H2) > Europe (H2) > Finland (H3)
Unaligned Aligned
-------------------------- --------------------------
Q1: H1 H3 H3 H3 __ __ __ __ __ H1 __ __ __ __ __ H3 H3 H3
Q2: H1 H1 H2 H2 H3 __ __ __ __ H1 H1 __ H2 H2 __ H3 __ __
Fig. 4 Example term alignment benefits of using heading independence with two sample
queries.H1:querytitle.H2:intermediateheading.H3:mainheading.__:padding.
12 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
Fig. 5 Example graph construction strategy from a Wikipedia article excerpt. Red boxes
arenodesrepresentingthecorrespondingentity,andyellowboxesareedgelabels.Adapted
fromhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheese.
entities that the page links to. Unlike WikiLinks, we enrich our knowledge
graph by labeling the edges using heading information.
More formally, let knowledge graph G = (E,R), where E is the set of
entities, and R is the set of relations. Let E be of the union of the set of all
articletopicentityandthesetofallentitiesfoundinlinks.Thesetofdirected
relationsRisdefinedasanypairofentitiesfor(t,m)wheretisanarticletopic,
and m is an entity mention in a paragraph relevant to the query. The edges
are labeled using the highest-level (non-title) heading of the paragraph. An
illustration of this process is shown in Figure 5. To address the data sparsity
problem caused by the large number of low-frequency headings, we only the
lemmatizedsyntacticheadofthemainheading.Furthermore,wecombineany
edgelabelthatdoesn’tappearinthee mostfrequentheadingsintoasingle
max
edge label. By using this approach, we are able to encode entity relations in a
way that maintains relations between high-frequency headings—precisely the
headings that need contextual hints from entities.
We use the knowledge graph G to construct HolE embeddings for the en-
tities and relations. HolE embeddings have been shown to perform the best
at entity link prediction by capturing rich interactions via circular correla-
tion [23]. First, we collect all entity mentions in the paragraph being ranked.
We collect entities from links that appear in Wikipedia paragraphs that tar-
getotherarticles.However,becauseWikipediaguidelinessuggestonlylinking
an entity on its first occurrence in an article 4, we also explore using an en-
tity extractor to find entity mentions (DBPedia Spotlight [5]). For each entity
mention,wecalculatetheentitysimilarityscore,giventhecurrentquerytopic
entity and the current heading label. We include the top n from the
entscores
4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Linking
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 13
Table 3 Datasetcharacteristicsfromthev1.5datarelease,includingcountsofautomatic
(Auto.)andManual(Man.)relevancejudgments.
Relevance
Dataset Articles Queries Auto. Man.
train.fold1-2(train) 114,387 873,746 2.2M -
test200(validation) 198 1,860 4.7k -
benchmarkY1test(test) 133 2,125 5.8k 30k
paragraph during the combination phase of the model (see Figure 3d). This
is similar to how some models perform k-max pooling of query term results.
This approach differs from contextual vectors because these signals refer to
the entire query-document combination, and not specific query terms.
3.4 Implementation details
We apply our methods for altering the generalized interaction-focused neural
ranking model to the PACRR model [12]. This model has been demonstrated
to be a strong approach for ad-hoc retrieval. To understand how our methods
are integrated into the system, we provide a short description of the model
architecture (see [12] for full details). For the matching phase, PACRR cal-
culates a Q×d similarity matrix between query and document terms using
wordembeddingsimilarityscores.Itthenperformssquareconvolutionalfilters
of multiple sizes (e.g., 2×2, 3×3, etc.) over the resulting similarity matrix.
Theresultofthesefiltersaremax-pooled.Then,scoresacrossquerytermsare
k-max pooled (k = 2) to get the top scores for each query term. Here, the
query term results are concatenated with IDF scores for each term. Finally,
the results are combined using a simple dense combination layer to produce a
final query-document relevance score.
We include contextual vectors after the query term pooling. The vectors
are simply concatenated alongside the IDF vector. For heading independence,
wesplitouttheworkupthroughthequerytermpooling.Weaddanadditional
denselayerheretofurtherconsolidateheadingpositioninformationbeforethe
finalcombinationphase.Weincludeknowledgegraphembeddingscoresinthe
combination phase, alongside the matching scores.
4 Experiment
In this section, we describe our primary experiment using the approaches de-
scribed in Section 3 and present our results using the CAR dataset.
14 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
Table 4 Manual relevance judgment counts and occurrence frequencies for bench-
markY1test.
RelevanceLabel Count % Value
Mustbementioned 2,461 8.3% 3
Shouldbementioned 1,970 6.7% 2
Canbementioned 3,094 10.5% 1
Roughlyontopic 9,219 31.2% 0
Non-relevant 12,785 43.2% -1
Trash 42 0.1% -2
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Dataset
WeusetheofficialTRECCARdataset(version1.5)forbothtrainingandeval-
uating our approach [7, 8]. This dataset was constructed from Wikipedia arti-
cles that represent topics (that is, it does not include meta or talk pages). All
the paragraphs are collected, disassociated with their articles and surround-
ing content, and used as the main collection for retrieval (30M paragraphs,
paragraphcorpus). The dataset also includes queries, which were automati-
callygeneratedfromthearticlestructure.Foreachquery,automaticrelevance
judgments are provided based on the assumption that paragraphs under a
particular heading are all valid answers to the corresponding query.
The dataset is split into subsets suitable for training and testing of sys-
tems (summary in Table 3). For a randomly-selected half of Wikipedia, all
data are provided for training (split into 5 folds, train.fold0-4). We use
folds 1 and 2 for training our models. A subset of approximately 200 articles
from train.fold0 was selected as an evaluation dataset by [22] (test200).
We use this as a validation dataset. Finally, 133 articles from the second half
of Wikipedia (the half that was not designated for training) were selected as
evaluation articles (benchmarkY1test). The TREC CAR 2017 task released
manual relevance judgments in addition to the automatic judgments available
for the other datasets [8]. The manual relevance judgments are graded on a
scalefromMustbementioned (3)toTrash (-2).Asummaryofthefrequencyof
theselabelsisgiveninTable4.Whilethemanualrelevancejudgmentsarecon-
sidered gold standard and are capable of matching relevant paragraphs from
other articles, they only cover a subset of queries (702 of the 2,125 queries).
4.1.2 Knowledge graph embeddings
WefirstgenerateaknowledgegraphusingthemethoddescribedinSection3.3.
We use the entire train.fold0-4 dataset to crease as extensive of a graph as
possible.Wegeneratetwoversionsofthegraph:oneusinghyperlinksasentity
mentions, and one using entity mentions extracted using the automatic entity
extractor DBPedia Spotlight [5] with a confidence setting of 0.5. Although
this tool is less accurate than manually-created links, it captures entities that
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 15
are not linked (e.g., the Wikipedia guidelines suggest only linking the first
mention of an entity in an article, leaving out subsequent mentions from the
graph). Edge labels are limited to only the e =1000 most frequently-used
max
labels. We test both versions of the graph when evaluating the performance
of using knowledge graph embedding scores. We train HolE embeddings using
the link graph for 5,000 iterations (we found this to be enough iterations for
thetrainingtoconverge),andchoosetheembeddingsfromtheepochwiththe
lowesterrorrate.Whenpickingwhichentityscorestoincludeinthemodel,we
use top n = 2 similarities (this matches the document term pooling
nentscores
parameter k in PACRR).
4.1.3 Training and evaluation
WetrainandevaluateseveralvariationsofthePACRRmodeltoexploretheef-
fectiveness of each approach. We train each model for 80 epochs with samples
from train.fold1-2 (we found this to be adequate based on pilot experi-
ments). Automatic relevance judgments serve as a source of relevant docu-
ments, and we use the top non-relevant BM25 documents as negative training
examples. Negative samples are used for the pairwise loss function used to
train PACRR, and BM25 results offer higher-quality negative samples than
random paragraph would (e.g., these examples have matching terms, whereas
random paragraphs likely would not).5 For each positive sample, we include 6
negativesamples.Toapoint,includingmorenegativesampleshasbeenshown
toimprovetheperformanceofPACRRattheexpenseoftrainingtime[16];we
found 6 negative samples to be an effective balance between the two consider-
ations. The training iteration that yields the highest R-Precision value on the
validationdataset(test200)isselectedforevaluationonthetestdataset.We
thenrerankthetop100BM25resultsforeachqueryinbenchmarkY1test,and
test using the manual and automatic relevance judgments. For each configu-
ration, we report the 4 official TREC CAR metrics: Mean Average Precision
(MAP),R-Precision(R-Prec),MeanReciprocalRank(MRR),andnormalized
Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG). We compare the results to an unmod-
ified version of PACRR trained using the same approach, the initial BM25
ranking, and the other top approaches submitted to TREC.
4.2 Results
We present the performance of our methods on CAR in Table 5. Overall, the
resultsshowthatourmethodsperformfavorablycomparedtotheunmodified
5 We acknowledge that some paragraphs included as negative training samples, if in-
spectedmanually,wouldbefoundrelevantduetothelimitationsoftheautomaticrelevance
judgments.Wedeemthisasokay,consideringthehighoccurrenceofnon-relevantdocuments
in the manual relevance judgments, and the comparatively poor performance of BM25 at
CAR.
16 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
Table 5 Performance results on test using manual and automatic relevance judgments.
Manualisevaluatedbothincludingandexcludingdocumentswithoutrelevancejudgments.
Thetopvalueineachsectionisinbold.Recordsmarkedwith*wereincludedintheTREC
documentpool.SignificantresultscomparedtotheunmodifiedPACRRmodelwithineach
sectionaremarkedwith(cid:78)and(cid:72)(pairedt-test,95%confidence).Theabbreviationsforour
methods are as follows: HP is the heading position contextual vector; HF is the heading
frequencycontextualvector;HIisheadingindependence;KG(links)usesknowledgegraph
similarity scores using entity mentions from Wikipedia links; KG (extr.) uses knowledge
graphsimilarityscoresusingentitymentionsextractedautomaticallyfromtheparagraph.
Approach MAP R-Prec MRR nDCG
Manual (including unjudged)
PACRR(nomodification) 0.208 0.219 0.445 0.403
PACRR+HP* 0.209 0.218 0.452 0.406
PACRR+HP+HF* (cid:78) 0.211 0.221 0.453 (cid:78) 0.408
PACRR+HI 0.205 0.213 0.442 0.403
PACRR+HI+HF 0.204 0.214 0.440 0.401
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(links) (cid:72)0.198 (cid:72)0.206 0.429 0.395
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(extr.) 0.200 (cid:72)0.206 0.433 0.396
Sequentialdependencemodel*[15] (cid:72)0.172 (cid:72)0.186 (cid:72)0.393 (cid:72)0.350
Siameseattentionnetwork*[19] (cid:72)0.137 (cid:72)0.171 (cid:72)0.345 (cid:72)0.274
BM25baseline* (cid:72)0.138 (cid:72)0.158 (cid:72)0.317 (cid:72)0.296
Manual (excluding unjudged)
PACRR(nomodification) 0.471 0.496 0.774 0.583
PACRR+HP* (cid:78)0.479 (cid:78)0.504 (cid:78)0.791 (cid:78)0.590
PACRR+HP+HF* (cid:78)0.480 (cid:78)0.509 (cid:78)0.794 (cid:78)0.592
PACRR+HI (cid:78)0.479 (cid:78)0.505 (cid:78)0.795 (cid:78)0.593
PACRR+HI+HF (cid:78)0.479 0.499 0.782 (cid:78)0.590
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(links) (cid:78)0.482 (cid:78)0.505 0.787 (cid:78)0.592
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(extr.) (cid:78)0.485 (cid:78)0.505 (cid:78)0.792 (cid:78)0.594
BM25baseline* (cid:72)0.452 (cid:72)0.476 (cid:72)0.747 (cid:72)0.566
Automatic
PACRR(nomodification) 0.164 0.131 0.247 0.254
PACRR+HP* (cid:78)0.170 0.135 (cid:78)0.258 (cid:78)0.260
PACRR+HP+HF* (cid:78)0.170 0.134 (cid:78)0.255 (cid:78)0.259
PACRR+HI (cid:78)0.171 0.139 (cid:78)0.256 (cid:78)0.260
PACRR+HI+HF (cid:78) 0.176 (cid:78) 0.146 (cid:78) 0.263 (cid:78) 0.265
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(links) (cid:78)0.174 (cid:78)0.141 (cid:78)0.260 (cid:78)0.263
PACRR+HI+HF+KG(extr.) (cid:78)0.173 (cid:78)0.140 (cid:78)0.260 (cid:78)0.262
Sequentialdependencemodel*[15] (cid:72)0.150 (cid:72)0.116 (cid:72)0.226 (cid:72)0.238
Siameseattentionnetwork*[19] (cid:72)0.121 (cid:72)0.096 (cid:72)0.185 (cid:72)0.175
BM25baseline* (cid:72)0.122 (cid:72)0.097 (cid:72)0.183 (cid:72)0.196
PACRRmodel,theotherothertopsubmissionstoTRECCAR2017(sequen-
tial dependency model [15] and the Siamese attention network [19]), and the
BM25 baseline (which our method re-ranks).
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 17
Duetotherelativelylownumberofmanualrelevancejudgmentsperquery6,
wereportmanualrelevancejudgmentsbothincludingandexcludingunjudged
paragraphs. When unjudged paragraphs are included, they are assumed to be
irrelevant.7 When unjudged documents are excluded, we filter unjudged para-
graphs from the ranked lists (i.e., we perform a condensed list evaluation).
The condensed list evaluation is a better comparison for methods that were
not included in the evaluation pool [28]. Indeed, PACRR with the heading
position and heading frequency contextual vectors outperforms the all other
approaches, and significantly outperforms the unmodified PACRR model in
terms of MAP and nDCG. Interestingly, the knowledge base approaches per-
formsignificantlyworsethantheunmodifiedPACRRintermsofR-Precwhen
unjudged paragraphs are included. However, when unjudged paragraphs are
notincluded,itperformssignificantlybetterineverycase.Infact,theversion
thatusesentityextractionwhencalculatingentityscoresperformsbestoverall
in terms of MAP and nDCG. This shows that these approaches are effective,
and likely rank paragraphs that are relevant yet unjudged high (reducing the
score when unjudged documents are included).
When considering automatic relevance judgments, heading independence
and the heading frequency contextual vector significantly outperforms un-
modified PACRR, and performs best overall in every metric. However, the
performance when evaluating with manual judgments does not significantly
outperform unmodified PACRR. Since training is also conducted using au-
tomatic relevance judgments, this may be caused by PACRR overfitting to
this sense of relevance. Interestingly, when the knowledge graphs features are
added to this approach, performance drops with automatic judgments, but
increases with manual judgments. This suggests that these features are useful
for determining human-classified relevance.
5 Analysis
Inthissection,weinvestigateseveralquestionssurroundingtheresultstogain
more insights into the behavior and functionality of the approaches to CAR
detailed in Section 3.
5.1 Characteristics of heading positions
Our approaches assert that heading positions (i.e., title, intermediate, and
main heading) act as a signal for heading utility. In Section 4.2 we showed
that including the heading position as either the heading position contextual
vector or via and heading independence improves performance beyond the
6 On average, there are 42 manual relevance judgments for the 702 queries that were
manuallyassessed.
7 Unjudged evaluation is unavailable for the sequential dependency model and Siamese
attentionnetwork.
18 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
ytisneD
Main Intermediate Title
Termoccurrencerate
Fig.6 Kerneldensityestimationformain(solid),intermediate(dashed),andtitle(dotted)
headingtermoccurrencerates,basedonautomaticjudgmentsintrain.fold0.
baseline neural architecture. Here, we test the hypothesis that terms found in
different heading positions exhibit different behaviors in relevant documents.
We use the term occurrence rate to assist in this analysis. We define term
occurrence rate occ(h) for a given heading h as the probability that any term
in a given heading appears in relevant paragraphs. More formally:
(cid:80)
I(∃t∈p|t∈h)
p∈rel(h)
occ(h)=
|rel(h)|
whererel(h)isthesetofrelevantparagraphsforpandI istheindicatorfunc-
tion.Althoughthetermoccurrencerateonlyaccountsforasinglebinaryterm
matchwithinrelevantdocuments,thisassumptionisjustifiedbythefactthat
headings are usually terse, and the neural architecture we use only considers
the top 2 matches for each query term for ranking purposes (PACRR’s query
term pooling).
In Figure 6, we plot a kernel density estimation of term occurrence distri-
butionsforeachheadingposition.Weusealltopicsfromthetrainingdataset,
andcalculatetermoccurrenceratesusingautomaticrelevancejudgments.The
figure shows that main headings are much more likely to appear in relevant
documents than titles and intermediate headings, with a much higher density
atthetermoccurrencerateof1.Thismatchesourpredictionthatmainhead-
ingsaremorelikelytobetopical,andthereforeappearinrelevantdocuments.
Furthermore, the distributions of intermediate and title headings are roughly
opposite each other, with titles more likely to occur than intermediate head-
ings. Note that, due to the hierarchical nature of CAR queries, intermediate
headings also appear as main headings in other queries for the same topic.
This contributes to the high frequency of main headings with a term occur-
rence rate of 0. Furthermore, many main headings are only used in a single
article(i.e.,onlyappearonceintheWikipediacollection),withonlyahandful
of paragraphs associated with them. This explains the multi-modal distribu-
tion seen for main headings; the small denominators result in local maxima
near 0.33, 0.5, and 0.67.
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 19
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Heading frequency
etar
ecnerrucco
mreT
Fig. 7 Term occurrence rate plotted by heading frequency. Heading frequency is grouped
and averaged by 100 for clarity. The area of each point is proportional to the number
of heading instances used to calculate the term occurrence rate. One very high frequency
heading(History)wasomittedforclarity(headingfrequency:15,220,termoccurrencerate:
0.035).Thetrendshowsthatlow-frequencyheadingsaremorelikelytoappearverbatimin
relevantparagraphsthanhigh-frequencyheadings.
5.2 Characteristics of high-frequency headings
In Section 4.2, we showed that including the heading frequency contextual
vector improved retrieval performance. We predicted that the model is able
to use this information to predict which query terms are likely to appear in
relevant documents. To investigate this behavior, we look at whether heading
frequency is correlated with term occurrence rates, and whether there is a
performance gap between low- and high-frequency headings.
In Figure 7, we plot term occurrence rates by heading frequency. The fig-
ure only includes headings that occur at least twice in train.fold0, and we
remove the extremely-frequent heading ‘History’ to improve readability, and
points are binned with a size of 100. The area of each point is proportional
to the number of heading instances. It is clear from the figure that the less
frequent a heading is, the higher the term occurrence rate. In general, head-
ingswithafrequencylessthan1,000haveanaverageheadingfrequency10-20
points higher than higher-frequency headings.
20 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
Table6 MAPscoresstratifiedbyheadingfrequencyofmainheadingforeachquery(man-
ualrelevancejudgments,excludingunjudged).Infrequentheadingsthatdonotappearelse-
where in the dataset are included in the ‘Infrq.’ column. The approaches yield the highest
performanceimprovementonthehigh-frequency(low-utility)queries.
Model Infrq. 0-20% 20-40% 40-60% 60-80% 80-100%
PACRR(unmod.) 0.503 0.521 0.453 0.388 0.412 0.366
+HP 0.509 0.520 0.464 0.400 0.430 0.377
+HP+HF 0.511 0.519 0.470 0.406 0.417 0.383
+HI 0.509 0.525 0.479 0.382 0.417 0.391
+HI+HF 0.509 0.519 0.474 0.403 0.409 0.379
+HI+HF+KG(links) 0.511 0.529 0.475 0.412 0.408 0.376
+HI+HF+KG(extr.) 0.513 0.535 0.477 0.416 0.407 0.380
BM25 0.482 0.480 0.429 0.378 0.420 0.373
Querycount 349 89 96 81 43 44
Max.%increase(tounmod.) +2.0% +2.7% +5.7% +7.2% +4.3% +6.8%
5.3 Difficultly matching high-frequency headings
Given the knowledge that high-frequency headings generally exhibit a low
term occurrence rate, we are interested in measuring whether there exists a
discrepancybetweentheperformanceatdifferentheadingfrequencies.Table6
showsaMAP8 performancebreakdownonthetestdataset(manualrelevance
judgments,unjudgedexcluded)stratifiedbytheheadingfrequencyofthemain
heading found in the training dataset. The number of queries in each stratum
varies because the strata were selected from equally-spaced breakpoints in
the training data, and the test set does not represent a uniform selection
of Wikipedia articles. The most frequent headings (80-100%, e.g., ‘History’
and ‘Early Life’) and exhibit the worst performance among all strata. This
matches our intuition that these low-utility headings are difficult to match.
The low frequency headings exhibit the highest performance by all models.
Notice that the gains compared to the unmodified PACRR are higher for
high-frequency headings than the low frequency headings, despite having a
worse performance overall. This validates our claims that low-utility headings
are harder to match than high-utility headings, and that our approaches are
able to improve performance for these queries.
6 Conclusion
Inthiswork,weproposedthatacentralchallengetoCARistheidentification
and mitigation of low-utility question facets. We introduced two techniques
for identifying low-utility facets: contextual vectors based on the hierarchi-
cal structure of CAR questions and corpus-wide facet usage information; and
8 We observed similar behavior for MAP, R-Prec, MRR, and nDCG, so we only report
MAPhere.
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 21
incorporation of independent matching pipelines for separate query compo-
nents. We then introduced one approach to mitigate low-utility facets, which
involves building a knowledge graph from the CAR training data, and using
entity similarity scores during query processing. We applied these approaches
to a leading neural ranking method, and evaluated using the TREC CAR
dataset. We found that our approach improved performance when compared
to the unmodified version of the ranker, and improve performance by up to
26%comparedtothenextbestapproach.Wethenperformedananalysisthat
verified that our indicators of facet utility were valuable, and that our ap-
proaches improve the performance on low-utility headings. As one of the first
comprehensive works on CAR, we expect our findings to shape the directions
taken for CAR in the future.
References
1. Auer S., Bizer C., Kobilarov G., Lehmann J., Cyganiak R., Ives Z. G.
(2007) DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In: ISWC/ASWC
2. Bollacker K. D., Evans C., Paritosh P., Sturge T., Taylor J. (2008) Free-
base: a collaboratively created graph database for structuring human
knowledge. In: SIGMOD 2008
3. BordesA.,UsunierN.,García-DuránA.,WestonJ.,YakhnenkoO.(2013)
Translatingembeddingsformodelingmulti-relationaldata.In:NIPS2013
4. DaiZ.,XiongC.,CallanJ.P.,LiuZ.(2018)Convolutionalneuralnetworks
for soft-matching n-grams in ad-hoc search. In: WSDM 2018
5. DaiberJ.,JakobM.,HokampC.,MendesP.N.(2013)Improvingefficiency
and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction. In: Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Semantic Systems (I-Semantics)
6. Dalton J., Dietz L., Allan J. (2014) Entity query feature expansion using
knowledge base links. In: SIGIR 2014, ACM
7. Dietz L., Gamari B. (2017) TREC CAR: A data set for complex answer
retrieval (version 1.5) URL http://trec-car.cs.unh.edu
8. Dietz L., Verma M., Radlinski F., Craswell N. (2017) TREC complex
answer retrieval overview. In: TREC 2017
9. Guo J., Fan Y., Ai Q., Croft W. B. (2016) A deep relevance matching
model for ad-hoc retrieval. In: CIKM 2016
10. Heilman J. M., West A. G. (2015) Wikipedia and medicine: quantifying
readership, editors, and the significance of natural language. Journal of
medical Internet research 17(3)
11. Huang P.-S., He X., Gao J., Deng L., Acero A., Heck L. (2013) Learning
deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data.
In: CIKM 2013
12. Hui K., Yates A., Berberich K., de Melo G. (2017) PACRR: A position-
aware neural IR model for relevance matching. In: EMNLP 2017
13. HuiK.,YatesA.,BerberichK.,deMeloG.(2018)Co-PACRR:Acontext-
aware neural IR model for ad-hoc retrieval. In: WSDM 2018
22 SeanMacAvaneyetal.
14. Levy O., Goldberg Y. (2014) Dependency-based word embeddings. In:
ACL 2014
15. LinX.,LamW.(2017)CUISteamforTREC2017CARtrack.In:TREC
2017
16. MacAvaneyS.,HuiK.,YatesA.(2017)Anapproachforweakly-supervised
deep information retrieval. NeuIR@SIGIR 2017
17. MacAvaney S., Yates A., Hui K. (2017) Contextualized PACRR for com-
plex answer retrieval. In: TREC 2017
18. MacAvaney S., Yates A., Cohan A., Soldaini L., Hui K., Goharian N.,
Frieder O. (2018) Characterizing question facets for complex answer re-
trieval. In: SIGIR 2018
19. Maldonado R., Taylor S., Harabagiu S. M. (2017) UTD HLTRI at TREC
2017: Complex answer retrieval track. In: TREC 2017
20. Metzler D., Croft W. B. (2005) A markov random field model for term
dependencies. In: SIGIR 2005
21. Mitra B., Diaz F., Craswell N. (2017) Learning to match using local and
distributed representations of text for web search. In: WWW 2017
22. Nanni F., Mitra B., Magnusson M., Dietz L. (2017) Benchmark for com-
plex answer retrieval. In: ICTIR 2017
23. Nickel M., Rosasco L., Poggio T. A. (2016) Holographic embeddings of
knowledge graphs. In: AAAI 2016
24. Nogueira R., Cho K. (2017) Task-oriented query reformulation with rein-
forcement learning. In: EMNLP 2017
25. Nogueira R., Cho K., Patel U., Chabot V. (2017) New york university
submission to TREC-CAR 2017. In: TREC 2017
26. PangL.,LanY.,GuoJ.,XuJ.,ChengX.(2016)AstudyofMatchPyramid
models on ad-hoc retrieval. In: NeuIR at SIGIR 2016
27. Pang L., Lan Y., Guo J., Xu J., Xu J., Cheng X. (2017) DeepRank: A
new deep architecture for relevance ranking in information retrieval. In:
CIKM 2017
28. Sakai T., Kando N. (2008) On information retrieval metrics designed for
evaluation with incomplete relevance assessments. Information Retrieval
11(5):447–470
29. SchuhmacherM.,DietzL.,PonzettoS.P.(2015)Rankingentitiesforweb
queries through text and knowledge. In: CIKM
30. Singh A. (2012) Entity based q&a retrieval. In: EMNLP-CoNLL
31. Singh S., Subramanya A., Pereira F., McCallum A. (2012) Wikilinks:
A large-scale cross-document coreference corpus labeled via links to
wikipedia. University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Tech Rep UM-CS-2012
15
32. Wang Z., Zhang J., Feng J., Chen Z. (2014) Knowledge graph embedding
by translating on hyperplanes. In: AAAI 2014
33. Xiong C., Callan J. (2015) Query expansion with Freebase. In: ICTIR
2015, ACM
34. Xiong C., Dai Z., Callan J., Liu Z., Power R. (2017) End-to-End Neural
Ad-hoc Ranking with Kernel Pooling. In: SIGIR 2017, ACM
OvercomingLow-UtilityFacetsforComplexAnswerRetrieval 23
35. tau Yih W., Chang M.-W., He X., Gao J. (2015) Semantic parsing via
staged query graph generation: Question answering with knowledge base.
In: ACL 2015
