6102
tcO
31
]YC.sc[
1v67240.0161:viXra
Perspectives on Surgical Data Science
1 2 1
S. Swaroop Vedula and Masaru Ishii and Gregory D. Hager
1
Departmentof Computer Science, The Johns HopkinsUniversity;
vedula@jhu.edu, hager@cs.jhu.edu
2
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine; mishii3@jhmi.edu
Abstract. The availability of large amounts of data together with ad-
vances in analytical techniques afford an opportunity to address diffi-
cult challenges in ensuring that healthcare is safe, effective, efficient,
patient-centered,equitable,andtimely.Surgicalcareandtrainingstand
totremendouslygainthroughsurgicaldatascience.Herein,wediscussa
few perspectives on thescope and objectives for surgical data science.
1 Introduction
Surgical data science is an emerging discipline with the objective of enabling
safe, effective, patient-centered, efficient, equitable, and timely surgical care by
meansofdataacquisition,modeling,andanalyticsto empowerclinicaldecision-
making. Surgical data science relies for data capture technology upon mechan-
ical, electrical, and electronics engineering, and for its analytic methods upon
other data-intensive disciplines such as computer science, statistics, mathemat-
ics, informationtheory, and epidemiology. Data science involves extracting gen-
eralizable knowledge from large amounts of data, which are often unstructured
orcomplex,andyields actionableproducts for decision-making[1].Surgicaldis-
ciplines have yet to benefit from the data science revolution mainly because of
limited data capture techniques. Surgical data science has now become feasible
because of parallel developments in two domains — technology to seamlessly
capture surgical data at scale, and statistical techniques and computational al-
gorithms to analyze large corpora of complex data from multiple sources.
While a data science approach is meaningful for any clinical discipline, we
emphasize surgery because it is an indispensable and integral component of
healthcare [2]. Globally, more than 234 million major surgical procedures are
performedeachyear[3].Still,about5billionhumanslackaccesstohigh-quality
surgical care [4]. Delivering safe, effective, patient-centered, efficient, equitable,
andtimelysurgicalcareisimpededbyseveralchallenges,someofwhichwepro-
posecanbeaddressedthroughadatascienceapproach.Inthisarticle,wediscuss
a proposed scope for surgical data science and the challenges we anticipate in
integrating data science into surgical care and education.
2 Scope for surgical data science
Surgical training Effectiveandefficientsurgicaltrainingisanecessityregardless
of available resources. Although poor surgical skill is associated with a higher
frequency of readmission, reoperation, and death [5], surgical education is in-
equitable, feedback provided to surgeons during training is inconsistent, and
assessmentof skilland competence remains unreliable [6,7,8]. Data-driventech-
nologiesforautomatedassessmentofperformance,diagnosisofskilldeficits,tar-
getedfeedbackthroughdemonstrationandexamples,andindividualizedtraining
are the next frontier for surgical education and credentialing across the globe.
Technologyfor automated assessmentmay be focused on surgicaltechnicalskill
and competence, non-technical skills, or clinical examination skills [8,9]. But
gaps exist in research on automated technologies for surgical training. First,
most such research has emphasized technical skill although non-technical skills
such as situation awareness,teamwork,and decision-makingare critical for safe
and effective surgical care [10]. Second, technology to automate diagnosis of
specific skill deficits and adaptive individualized feedback require learning from
larger amounts of data than those typically utilized in researchthus far. Third,
algorithmsto predict skillhaveyetto be translatedinto data products thatcan
be integrated into surgical training curricula.
Automatedassistivetechnologiesforsurgicaldecision-making Technologyaffords
tremendous opportunity to enhance patient safety because it is seamlessly inte-
grated into surgical care, for example, with laparoscopic,endoscopic, or robotic
techniques. Technical errors accounted for patient injuries more than half the
time in a study of surgical malpractice claims in the United States, of which a
majority were manual errorsand resulted in permanent disability or death [11].
Automatedassistivesurgicaltechnologies,suchasanautomatedcoachmaymit-
igate certain technical errors. Manual coaching by an expert surgeon has been
showntoimprovesurgicalperformanceandreduceerrors[12].Automatedassis-
tivesurgicaltechnologiesmayalsoserveotherpurposessuchassurgicaldecision-
making and context aware surgical systems that detect patient workflow and
surgical activity. But automated intra-operative assistive surgical technologies
are far from being adequately developed for deployment in the operating room
because oftwomajorlimitations. First,althoughsome algorithmsperformwith
reasonable accuracy to recognize surgical phases, input from other stakeholders
such as caregiversand patients is needed to transform the algorithms into tools
with utility in the operating room.Second, techniques have yet to be developed
that efficiently assimilate data from multiple sources (e.g., tool motion, video,
environmental cues, physiologic monitoring) and enable development of appli-
cations using the extracted information. A collaborative data science approach
has the potential to establish the role of assistive surgical technologies in pre-,
intra-, and post-operative patient care.
Variability and value of surgical patient care Variability in healthcare in gen-
eral, and surgical care in particular, has had a large influence on evolution of
policy. Landmark observations about geographic variation in patient outcomes
has spurred an emphasis on quality of patient care [13]. Most such efforts have
focused on achieving certain benchamarks for a few patient outcomes at the
population-level, e.g., 30-day mortality [13]. But patient outcomes alone may
notbeadequatetodevelopahealthsystemthatdeliversefficient,equitable,and
timely care. Studying variability in patient care processes can yield improve-
ments in efficiency and value of care, which is defined as outcomes achieved per
monetary unit spent [14]. A data science approach can facilitate understanding
andoptimizingpatientcareprocessesinthepre-andpost-operativesettingsbe-
causedatainthesecontextsareoftenunstructuredandavailablefromdisparate
sources. Data-driven insights into optimizing patient care workflow before and
after surgery can minimize variationin care patterns and patient outcomes. Al-
gorithms to model the relationship between patients’ clinical course following
surgery and their outcomes can be used to develop tools for timely detection of
patients at risk for poor outcomes, and efficiently allocating system resources.
Effectiveness of surgical treatmentsfor decision-making Theeffectivenessofsur-
gicalinterventionsishighlyinfluencedbytheskillwithwhichtheyaredelivered,
unlike non-surgical treatments that involve simply ingesting a medication at a
precisely titrated dose. Thus advances in surgical care through shared quan-
tifiable knowledge require systematic, objective, and valid measures of surgical
skill,bothtechnicalandnon-technical.Forexample,settingupfaircomparisons
in randomized controlled trials or establishing registries to enable discovery of
effective surgical treatments is impeded by lack of standardized, objective, and
validmeasuresofskillandoutcomes[15].Automatedvalidassessmentoftechni-
cal and non-technical surgical skill will also allow development of technological
tools to support surgical decision-making in patient care, for example to indi-
vidualize the choice of optimal surgical technique (laparoscopic vs. robotic) or
treatment approach (e.g., use of mesh vs. natural tissue repair for a hernia).
3 Challenges to assimilate surgical data science
A few major challenges that need to be addressed for surgical data science to
reach fruition are mentioned here. First, surgical data are not routinely cap-
turedat scale.Integratinga culture ofroutine data collectioninto surgicalcare,
and consistent data capture and processing infrastructure are necessary to pro-
motesurgicaldatasciencethroughuniformdatarepositoriesacrossinstitutions.
Such repositories are essential to accelerate the pace of discoveries from data
through collaborative analytics. Second, there is considerable heterogeneity in
how surgicalproceduresaredescribedacrossthe world.Standardizedontologies
to describe surgical procedures can not only facilitate collaborative analytics
across data repositories but also promote discovery of shared knowledge across
surgical procedures. In addition, uniform ontologies can catalyze the adoption
of data products by healthcare decision-makers. Finally, current research using
machinelearninginsurgeryis gearedtowardsoptimizingalgorithmsto solvefo-
cusedtechnicalproblems,e.g.,surgicalphasedetection.Realisticdataproducts,
together with solutions for socio-technical issues of understanding how to inte-
grate these new information sources into organizations in ways that allow their
effective use, are needed to promote data science in healthcare decision-making.
4 Conclusion
Surgicaldatascienceisascientificdisciplinewhosetimehascome.Adatascience
approachtoidentifyandaddresschallengesinthesurgicalcontextwilltransform
how data are used to advance patient care and surgicaltraining. Educating key
constituents, standardizing data infrastructure to maximize collective utility of
disparate repositories, and promoting collaborations through dedicated funding
mechanisms are necessary to realize the full potential of surgical data science.
References
1. Dhar, V. Data science and prediction. Communications of the ACM. 56, 64-73
(2013).
2. Meara, J.G., Hagander, L., Leather, A.J.M.: Surgery and global health: a Lancet
Commission. Lancet. 383 (9911), 12-13 (2014)
3. Weiser,T.G.,Regenbogen,S.E.,Thompson,K.D.,et.al.:Anestimationoftheglobal
volumeofsurgery:amodelingstrategybasedonavailabledata.Lancet.372,139-144
(2008).
4. Meara, J.G., Leather, A.J.M., Hagander, L., et.al.: Global Surgery 2030: evidence
andsolutionsforachievinghealth,welfare,andeconomicdevelopment.Lancet.386,
569-624 (2015).
5. Birkmeyer,J.D.,Finks,J.F.,OReilly,A.,et.al.:Surgicalskillandcomplicationrates
after bariatric surgery.N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 1434-1442 (2013).
6. Mock,C.,Cherian,M.,Juillard,C.,et.al.:Developingprioritiesforaddressingsurgi-
calconditionsglobally:furtheringthelinkbetweensurgeryandpublichealthpolicy.
World J Surg. 34, 381-385 (2010).
7. Bell Jr., R.H.Why Johnny cannot operate. Surgery.146, 533-542 (2009).
8. Szasz, P.,Louridas, M., Harris, K.A.,et.al.: Assessing technicalcompetence insur-
gical trainees: a systematic review. Ann.Surg. 261, 1046-55 (2015).
9. Laufer,S.,Cohen,E.R.,Kwan,C.,et.al.Sensortechnologyinassessmentsofclinical
skills. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 784-786 (2015).
10. Yule, S., Flin, R., Paterson-Brown, S., et.al. Non-technical skills for surgeons: a
review of theliterature. Surgery.139, 140-149 (2006).
11. Regenbogen, S.E., Greenberg, C., Studdert, D., et.al. Patterns of technical error
among surgical malpractice claims: an analysis of strategies to prevent injury to
surgical patients. Ann.Surg. 246, 705-711 (2007).
12. Bonrath,E.M., Dedy,N.J.,Gordon,L.E.,et.al. ComprehensiveSurgicalCoaching
Enhances Surgical Skill in the Operating Room: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
Ann Surg.262, 205-212 (2015).
13. Luft, H.S., Bunker, J.P., Enthoven, A.C. Should operations be regionalized? The
em-pirical relation between surgical volume and mortality. N. Engl. J. Med. 301,
1364-1369 (1979).
14. Porter,M.E.Whatisvalueinhealthcare?N.Engl.J.Med.363,24772481 (2010).
15. Cook, J.A. The challenges faced in the design, conduct and analysis of surgical
randomized controlled trials. Trials. 10, 9 (2009).
