Version December 19, 2025
PreprinttypesetusingLATEXstyleopenjournalv.09/06/15
PULSAR SCIENCE WITH THE SKA OBSERVATORY
Bhal Chandra Joshi1,2
1NationalCentreforRadioAstrophysics,SPPuneUniversityCampus,Pune411007,Maharashtra,Indiaand
2DepartmentofPhysics,IndianInstituteofTechnologyRoorkee,Roorkee247667,Uttarakhand,India
Aris Karastergiou3
3DepartmentofAstrophysics,UniversityofOxford,DenysWilkinsonBuilding,KebleRoad,OxfordOX13RH,UK
Marta Burgay4
4INAF-OsservatorioAstronomicodiCagliari,viadellaScienza5,09047Selargius(CA),Italy
The SKA pulsar science working group
Version December 19, 2025
Abstract
The large instantaneous sensitivity, a wide frequency coverage and flexible observation modes with
large number of beams in the sky are the main features of the SKA observatory’s two telescopes,
the SKA-Low and the SKA-Mid, which are located on two different continents. Owing to these
capabilities, the SKAO telescopes are going to be a game-changer for radio astronomy in general
and pulsar astronomy in particular. The eleven articles in this special issue on pulsar science with
the SKA Observatory describe its impact on different areas of pulsar science. In this lead article, a
briefdescriptionofthetwotelescopeshighlightingtherelevantfeaturesforpulsarscienceispresented
followedbyanoverviewofeachaccompanyingarticle,exploringtheinter-relationshipbetweendifferent
pulsar science use cases.
1. INTRODUCTION tronstars(NS),makingitpossibletouncoverevolution-
ary pathways between different types of NS (Levin et al.
The SKA Observatory (SKAO) is going to be a game-
2025). The larger population sample will enhance our
changer for radio astronomy in the coming decade. The
understanding of the magneto-ionic interstellar medium
constructionofthisuniqueinstrument,comprisingoftwo
(Tiburzi et al. 2025; Xu et al. 2025), the pulsar magne-
telescopes in two different continents, has already com-
tosphere (Oswald et al. 2025) and pulsar wind nebulae
mencedwiththephase1ofthesetelescopesprovidingan
(Gelfand et al. 2025). Moreover, the discovery of exotic
unprecedentedseamlessfrequencycoveragefrom50MHz
neutron star systems will test gravity theory ever more
to15GHzwithunmatchedsensitivitiesinhighlyflexible
stringently (Krishnan et al. 2025) and will probe funda-
interferometric configurations. Therefore, the SKAO is
mental physics at sub-atomic level (Basu et al. 2025).
expectedtoenablearangeofdiverseastronomicalinves-
Finally, this enhanced sample is likely to make the sky
tigationswithsignificantimpactonfundamentalaspects
portrait sharper in nano-Hertz gravitational waves im-
of astrophysics.
pacting on our understanding of the Universe in a fun-
One such area of radio astronomy, where the SKAO
damental way (Shannon et al. 2025). In summary, the
is expected to make fundamental discoveries, is pulsar
papers in this special issue describe the way the upcom-
astronomy. Historically, new instruments have acceler-
ing SKA Observatory’s telescopes address fundamental
ated the pace of progress in pulsar astronomy (Figure 1)
physics through the study of pulsars and gravitational
and the SKAO telescopes are likely to drive significant
waves.
progress in this field in the next decade. The phase 1
The SKAO has been in planning over the last two
of the rollout of the SKAO telescope, called AA4 (Ar-
decades and pulsar astronomy itself has evolved over
ray Assembly 4), is likely to double the known pulsar
these decades, often driven by new discoveries by the
population in new surveys (Keane et al. 2025; Abbate
SKA precursor and pathfinder instruments. Conse-
et al. 2025; Bagchi et al. 2025). These new discoveries
quently, the wish list of pulsar astronomers, enumerated
will improve our understanding of the dynamics, evolu-
almost a decade ago (Kramer and Stappers 2015), has
tion and gas content of globular clusters (Bagchi et al.
also expanded. Moreover, practical considerations led
2025) and the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way
to a revised design of SKAO telescopes since 2015, with
galaxy (Abbate et al. 2025) apart from increasing the
a nominal loss of 50 % and 30% in collecting area for
samplesforeachofdifferentkindsofradioemittingneu-
the SKA-Low and the SKA-Mid telescopes respectively.
5202
ceD
81
]EH.hp-ortsa[
1v25161.2152:viXra
2
Fig. 1.—Thediscoveryofpulsarshasapproximatelyoccurredatanexponentialratewithtime,matchingdevelopmentsinnewtelescope
hardware and software. The significant increase in the last decade corresponds to commencement of operation of upgraded GMRT,
MeerKATandFASTinstruments. CurrenttelescopesandfutureassembliesoftheSKAOwillcontinuethistrend.
Withthe constructionof the re-baselinedtelescopes well quencies. Each SKA-Low station consists of 256 such
underway,thepulsarcommunitycanbetterdefinetheex- antennas equivalent to a 39-m single dish with an ex-
pectedscienceoutcomesfromtheseinstruments. Abrief pected primary beam of 2.2 degrees at 200 MHz. The
overview of the evolving landscape of pulsar astronomy AA*configurationisplannedtohave307stations,rising
enabled by the upcoming SKAO telescopes is presented to 512 stations for AA4, with a maximum separation of
in this article introducing the main themes reviewed in 74 km between antenna stations. The number of closely
subsequent articles of this special issue. spaced stations within a 530-m core of the interferom-
eter is 224. The rest will be arranged in a spiral arm
2. THE SKAO TELESCOPES AND PULSAR geometry, extending outwards from the core. The AA*
OBSERVATIONS will have 199 core stations, whereas AA4 will have the
The SKAO telescopes are conceived as two telescopes full complement of 224 core stations. From the point of
geographicallystationedondifferentcontinentsandwith view of pulsar observations, the output of these stations
different designs. The SKA-Low telescope is located in canbecombinedinphaseasatiedarray,whereindepen-
Australia, whereas the SKA-Mid is coming up in South dentlysteerablemultipledualpolarizationbeamscanbe
Africa. Together, the two telescopes cover an observing formed within the primary beam of each station as ex-
frequency range of 50 MHz to 15 GHz. The two tele- plained later. The availability of multiple beams within
scopes will be commissioned and operated by an inter- thewideprimarybeamhasasignificantimpactonpulsar
governmental organisation bringing together more than sciencecaseaswouldbeillustratedintheaccompanying
13 nations from around the world in a unique collabora- articles of this special issue.
tive international effort. SKA-Mid: This telescope is located in the Karoo re-
The construction plan of the SKAO telescopes is en- gionofSouthAfrica. ThearraywilluseoffsetGregorian
visaged as a staged delivery of evolving array assembly dishes to cover an observing band from 0.35−15.4GHz
(AA). The earliest milestone, AA*, is likely be delivered withatargetextensionofupto24GHz. Thus,theSKA-
between 2029 to 2031, and the design baseline AA4 will Mid telescope’s frequency range complements the SKA-
follow depending on funding1. We briefly summarise the Low observing band. The telescope will subsume the
main features of the two SKAO telescopes below high- already commissioned dishes of the MeerKAT telescope,
lighting the capabilities important for pulsar science: which has been operating as a pathfinder telescope for
SKA-Low: ThetelescopesiteisinWesternAustralia’s the SKAO for the last 6 years at the same site. In the
Murchison shire on the traditional lands of the Wajarri AA* configuration, the array will consist of 144 dishes,
Yamajiandhasbeendesignedtooperateatlowradiofre- comprising 64 existing 13.5-meter MeerKAT dishes and
quencies, between 50−350MHz. Unlike typical dishes, 80 new 15-meter SKA dishes. In the AA4 configuration,
the SKA-Low telescope is built from ‘wired’ log-periodic thefullarraywillinclude197dishes,withthenumberof
antennas, a design which is efficient at low radio fre- SKAdishesincreasingfrom80to133. Thespatialdistri-
butionofthedishesissimilartotheSKA-Lowtelescope,
1 Please refer to https://www.skao.int/en/science- where∼50%ofthedisheswillformthecentralcoreof∼2
users/599/scientific-timelinefordetails.
3
km in extent, while the remaining 50% will emerge out the single-pulse search pipeline will identify astrophysi-
of the central core in three spiral arms spanning a maxi- caltransientevents,operatingeitheralongsidetheaccel-
mumbaselineof150km. Giventhehigherobservingfre- eration search or commensally during non-pulsar obser-
quenciesavailableintheSKA-Midtelescope,theprimary vations.
beam is much smaller than that in the SKA-Low and In a recent development, some of theabovementioned
progressively reduces for higher frequency bands. The capabilities of the SKAO telescopes have been deferred
observing frequencies from 0.35−15.4GHz are covered for a later date. These include 50 fewer stations in the
with 5 bands (Band 1 to 5) with bandwidths ranging SKA-Low telescope core for AA* and reduction in the
from 700 to 2500 MHz. The most relevant bands for number of beams of the PSS. These capabilities will be
the pulsar science case are Band 1 (350−1050 MHz) and restored at a later date. While this does not impact the
Band 2 (950−1760 MHz), although Band 4 and 5 will overall science outcome for pulsar science described in
be relevant for the science case related to the Galactic this special issue, it may impact the time-line of achiev-
centre survey and follow up observations (Abbate et al. ing these goals in a major way. Therefore, it is highly
2025). Similar to the SKA-Low, the output of these sta- desirable to reinstate these capabilities as early as possi-
tions can be combined in phase as a tied array, where ble in the roll out of the SKAO telescopes.
independently steerable multiple beams can be formed The SKAO telescopes will provide unprecedented sen-
within the primary beam. sitivityover50MHzto15GHz. TheSKA-Midtelescope
TheSKAOisaninterferometerwellsuitedforimaging will be around three to four times more sensitive than
observations. Asmallpartofthepulsarsciencecasedoes MeerKAT in the AA* and AA4 configurations, respec-
involve such imaging observations (Gelfand et al. 2025), tively. AsimilarprogressionisexpectedfortheSKA-Low
butthemajorfractionofpulsarsciencewillinvolvenon- telescope,whichwilleventuallysurpassthesensitivityof
imaging data processing requiring specialised hardware the low-frequency array LOFAR by nearly an order of
andsoftwareforprocessingrawdataspectraltime-series. magnitude once fully deployed. The ability to flexibly
The SKAO will utilise two non-imaging data process- combine the stations and the antennas in the SKA-Low
ing components for pulsar science, which are briefly de- and SKA-Mid telescopes as multiple subarrays assigned
scribed below. to different beams provided by the PST, coupled with
The Pulsar Timing Subsystem (PST) is part of large number of beams in the PSS within the relatively
SKAO’s Central Signal Processor (CSP) and is respon- large primary beam of the telescopes, along with near
sible for the high-precision timing and sensitive observa- real-time search capability and capability to produce a
tions of pulsars. During AA*, the PST will support the varietyofreduceddataproducts,willbeagame-changer
processingofupto8and16dual-polarisationwide-band for a variety of pulsar science when combined with an
tied-array beams for the SKA-Low and the SKA-Mid order of magnitude increase in instantaneous sensitivity
telescopes, respectively, using input from the correlator- of SKAO telescopes over the current instruments.
beamformer (CBF). By AA4, both the SKA-Low and
the SKA-Mid telescopes are expected to handle up to 3. STATE OF THE ART AND EXPECTED SKAO
16 simultaneous beams. The corresponding bandwidths DISCOVERIES
will be 300MHz for the SKA-low and up to 2500MHz
There have been significant advances in pulsar astron-
for the SKA-Mid telescope. Depending on the configu-
omy since the pulsar science case for the SKAO was
ration, these tied array beams can be distributed across
drafted two decades ago, particularly since its update
up to 16 subarrays. In order to support a range of sci-
a decade back (Kramer and Stappers 2015). The grav-
entific use cases, the PST will be capable of generating
itational waves at high frequencies have been detected
a suite of different data products, including channelised
frommorethan200sourcesandthepulsartimingarrays
dual-polarisationvoltagetime-series,timeandfrequency
areclosetoasignificantdetectionofnano-Hertzgravita-
resolved PSRFITS filterbanks, and integrated pulse pro-
tionalwavesopeningupamessengerthattheSKAOtele-
files.
scopecanexploreinearnest. Moreexoticbinarysystems
The Pulsar Search Subsystem (PSS) is another key
have been discovered and mass and radius for several
component of SKAO’s CSP. It is designed to carry out
NS are measured to a good precision motivating investi-
near real-time searches of the sky visible from SKAO’s
gations in fundamental physics using pulsars as probes.
sites for pulsars and transient radio sources. The PSS
The large instantaneous sensitivity and flexibility of the
combines custom hardware and dedicated software opti-
SKAO telescope will make a significant impact on the
mised for high-throughput, real-time signal processing.
pulsar science case with doubling the pulsar population
DuringAA*,itwillsupporttheparallelprocessingofup
inapulsarsurvey,whichformsthebasisforfundamental
to 250 and 1125 tied-array beams for the SKA-Low and
physicsstudiesinterconnectedwithotherareasofpulsar
the SKA-Mid telescopes, respectively, increasing to 500
astronomy as illustrated in Figure 2. A brief overview of
and1500beamsbyAA4. Theprocessedbandwidthswill
thecurrentstatusofthesesciencecaseswithanticipated
be100MHzfortheSKA-Lowandupto300MHzforthe
impactoftheSKAOispresentedinthenextfewsections
SKA-Midtelescope. TheSKA-Midbeamformerwillsup-
with the details elaborated in the accompanying articles
ply channelised, full-polarisation data to the PSS, while
in this special issue.
the SKA-Low beamformer will provide dual-polarisation
voltage data. Beams may be flexibly grouped into up to
3.1. The SKA Pulsar Census (Keane et al.)
16 independent subarrays, subject to some restrictions.
The PSS will perform pulsar searches on integrations of Overthepastfiftyyears,pulsarsurveyshaveexpanded
upto1800sandfrequency-domainaccelerationsearches theknownpopulationtoover4000sources,revealingex-
in integration times of up to 10 minutes. In parallel, traordinary diversity in spin, magnetic field, and evo-
4
NS EoS GWs and PTA Testing gravity
PSR Magnetized
PWN ISM NS Population
Magnetosphere ISM
Galactic Center PSRs in
PSR Surveys
Pulsars Globular clusters
Fig. 2.—Theinter-connectedpulsarscienceusecasesfortheSKAO,describedinthisspecialissue,aredepictedhere. Thesurveysshown
atthebottomformthebackboneofthestudyofdifferentareasdepictedinthemiddlerow. Theenhancedunderstandinginthelatterwill
feedintothethreemaincontributionstofundamentalphysicsfrompulsarastronomy,whichareshowninthetoprow.
lutionary stage. Yet, population synthesis models pre- sources in the outer Galaxy. This comprehensive census
dict that the Milky Way hosts more than 50,000 active willserveasthefoundationforallsubsequentSKApulsar
pulsars. Even with modern facilities such as Murriyang investigations, forming the most complete neutron-star
(theParkesradiotelescope),FAST,andMeerKAT,much catalogue in existence (Keane et al. 2025).
of this population—particularly faint, distant, or fast-
spinning pulsars—remains undetected. A complete cen- 3.2. Pulsars in Globular Clusters (Bagchi et al.)
sus of pulsars is the foundation for nearly all SKA pul-
Globular clusters (GCs) are stellar systems with ex-
sar science, underpinning studies of Galactic structure,
treme densities, where frequent stellar encounters lead
neutron-star physics, and gravitational-wave detection.
to efficient formation of millisecond pulsars through bi-
TheSKA-LowAA*andSKA-MidAA*arrayswill
naryrecycling. SurveyswithArecibo,Parkes,andFAST
form a coordinated two-tier survey strategy. The SKA-
have discovered 345 cluster pulsars, some probing exotic
Low telescope will sweep the Galactic halo and high-
regimessuchaspulsar–black-holebinariesandultradense
latitude regions at low frequencies, while the SKA-Mid
stellar cores. Yet, modelling suggests that thousands of
telescope will target the dense Galactic plane where dis-
cluster MSPs remain hidden, limited primarily by tele-
persion and scattering are strongest. Together, they are
scope sensitivity.
expectedtodetectapproximately10,000slowpulsarsand
The SKA-Mid AA* array will make immediate
nearly 800 millisecond pulsars (MSPs), more than dou-
breakthroughsthroughtargeted,deepsearchesofGalac-
bling the known population. This early delivery phase
tic clusters, where only a few tied-array beams are re-
will already establish a statistically robust sample for
quired. Early observations are expected to more than
pulsar timing array and population studies.
doublethenumberofknownclusterpulsarsbydetecting
ThefullAA4configurationwillincreasesensitivityby
faint and distant MSPs previously below the detection
20–30%, raising the total yield above 12,000 pulsars and
threshold. The SKA-Low AA* will complement these
providing complete coverage of the Galactic disk, bulge,
searches at lowerfrequencies, identifyingsteep-spectrum
andhalo. TheSKA-Mid AA4willdeliverultra-precise
sources and diffuse emission halos around cluster cores.
timing of high-dispersion and relativistic systems, while
Once the full AA4 arrays are operational, the SKA-
theSKA-LowAA4willidentifyolder,faint,anddiffuse
Mid AA4 could increase the total number of detected
5
cluster pulsars by a factor of four to five—up to 1,700 In the AA4 era, SKA-Mid will conduct continu-
pulsars across the Galactic GC population. The SKA- ous timing and polarization monitoring of thousands
Low AA4willsimultaneouslymonitormultipleclusters of sources, measuring glitches, emission variability, and
to measure dispersion and rotation measures, mapping magnetospheric changes, while SKA-Low will expand
intra-cluster gas and magnetic fields. These data will discoverysurveysintotheGalactichalo. Thesecombined
enable precision timing of exotic binaries, exploration of efforts will yield the first statistically complete neutron-
clusterevolution,andtestsofgravityinthedenseststel- star census, tracing evolutionary pathways and unifying
lar environments (Bagchi et al. 2025). disparate classes within a single population framework
(Levin et al. 2025).
3.3. Galactic Centre Pulsars (Abbate et al.)
3.5. Pulsar Magnetospheres (Oswald et al.)
The Galactic Centre, hosting Sagittarius A*, is one
of the most extreme gravitational environments known. Advances in radio and high-energy astrophysics have
Infrared monitoring of orbiting stars has confirmed the revealed that pulsar magnetospheres exhibit extraordi-
black hole’s mass and Schwarzschild precession, but nary complexity, including non-dipolar fields, plasma in-
pulsars—ideal clocks in curved spacetime—have yet to stabilities, and emission variability. Observations with
be found in close orbit. Despite decades of surveys with FAST, MeerKAT, and NICER have deepened our un-
Parkes, Effelsberg, and the Green Bank Telescope, only derstanding but left the core questions—how and where
seven pulsars within 100 pc of the Centre are known, coherent radio emission arises—unanswered.
their detection hindered by severe radio scattering. The SKA-Mid AA* array, with its wide band-
The SKA-Mid AA* configuration will overcome width and unmatched frequency coverage, particularly
this barrier through its high-frequency coverage (up to using sub-arrays for concurrent multi-band observations
15 GHz) and sensitivity, capable of detecting heav- together with its large sensitivity, will conduct high-
ily scattered pulsar signals near Sgr A*. Meanwhile, cadence monitoring of polarization and single-pulse be-
the SKA-Low AA* will map the intervening ionized havior in hundreds of pulsars. This will constrain mag-
mediumandmeasurescatteringproperties. Evenduring netic geometry and emission altitude, while the SKA-
early operations, AA* is expected to uncover dozens of Low AA* will probe coherent plasma processes near
newpulsarsintheregion,expandingthesampledramat- the stellar surface. Together, the SKA-Low and SKA-
ically. Midarrayswillbridgeobservationalandtheoreticalgaps
At full power, the SKA-Mid AA4 will time pulsars in pulsar emission physics.
orbiting Sgr A* with microsecond precision, measuring In the AA4 configuration, the SKA-Mid will mon-
its spin and quadrupole moment—yielding direct tests itor thousands of pulsars at sub-millisecond resolution,
of the cosmic censorship and no-hair theorems. The uncovering population-wide variability patterns, while
SKA-Low AA4willexpandthesurveyareatoidentify the SKA-Low will capture weak, intermittent, or low-
brighttransients/pulsarsinthesurroundingstar-forming frequency emission signatures. These results will refine
region. Together, these discoveries will transform our modelsofmagnetosphericstructure, testtheoriesofpar-
understanding of the Galactic Centre’s plasma physics, ticle acceleration, and link observed radio emission di-
gravitational field, and possibly its dark-matter content rectly to fundamental plasma dynamics (Oswald et al.
(Abbate et al. 2025). 2025).
3.4. The Galactic Neutron Star Population (Levin et 3.6. Galactic Plasma Studies (Tiburzi et al.)
al.)
Pulsars have long served as precise probes of the
The past half century has revealed that neutron stars Galaxy’s ionized plasma. Observations with LOFAR,
manifest in many forms—ordinary pulsars, magnetars, GMRT,andMeerKAThavetracedelectron-densityfluc-
rotating radio transients (RRATs), intermittent pulsars, tuations and revealed turbulence consistent with a Kol-
centralcompactobjects(CCOs),andmillisecondpulsars mogorov spectrum, while long-term DM monitoring has
(MSPs),manyofthelatterinexoticbinarysystems,such exposedchangesduetosolarwindandinterstellarstruc-
as double neutron stars, triple system and transitional tures. Yet, these measurements are limited in frequency
pulsars—each providing insight into extreme physics. coverage and spatial sampling.
However, biases toward bright, long-lived sources have The SKA-Low AA* array will achieve unmatched
obscured the true diversity of this population. Many precision in dispersion and scattering studies, tracking
faint, intermittent, or short-lived neutron stars remain DM variations across hundreds of channels and enabling
undetected, preventing a unified view of their life cycles. detailed mapping of the turbulent interstellar medium.
The SKA-Low AA* and the SKA-Mid AA* tele- In parallel, the SKA-Mid AA* will provide high-
scopes will bridge these gaps by discovering and charac- frequency coverage to separate frequency-dependent dis-
terizing thousands of new neutron stars across all sub- persion from refraction, allowing a full multi-scale char-
groups. The SKA-Low AA*, with its broad field of acterizationofGalacticplasmaandsolar-winddynamics.
view,willbeidealfordetectingfaintandsteep-spectrum Once AA4 arrays are in place, the SKA-Low will
sources, while the SKA-Mid AA* will enable high- deliver a high-resolution 3D model of Galactic electron
cadence timing and polarization studies to classify and density, while the SKA-Mid will furnish ultra-stable
connect subpopulations. Together, these facilities will timing data critical to Pulsar Timing Arrays. Together,
reveal transitional objects—linking, for example, high-B they will refine models of plasma turbulence, correct for
pulsarstomagnetarsorRRATstoordinarypulsars—and ISM effects in gravitational-wave searches, and provide
provide the first coherent picture of neutron-star evolu- themostcomprehensiveviewtodateoftheMilkyWay’s
tion. magneto-ionic medium (Tiburzi et al. 2025).
6
3.7. Galactic Magnetic Fields (Xu et al.) TheSKA-Mid AA*arraywillrevolutionizethisfield
by increasing timing precision by an order of magni-
The study of Galactic magnetism has progressed from
tudeanddetectingmanynewrelativisticbinaries. Early
optical polarization measurements to radio Faraday ro-
AA* observations will measure minute effects such as
tation mapping using pulsars and extragalactic sources.
Shapirodelay,gravitationalredshift,andframedragging
Large scale experiments with FAST, MeerKAT and
in known systems. In parallel, the SKA-Low AA* will
Parkes have revealed large-scale field reversals and mag-
survey for long-period and eccentric binaries, populat-
netized halo structures, yet data remain confined to the
ing the full parameter space of relativistic systems for
local half of the disk. The three-dimensional structure
gravity tests. The timing precision will also be signifi-
and global symmetry of the Milky Way’s magnetic field
cantlyimprovedincorporatingsystematicsduetopropa-
remain incompletely characterized.
gationeffectsintheinter-stellarmediumusingthelower
The SKA-Mid AA* and SKA-Low AA* arrays
frequencies provided by both the SKA-Mid and SKA-
will transform this picture. Early-phase (AA*) obser-
Low telescopes.
vations will triple the number of pulsars with measured
The large instantaneous sensitivity of AA* and AA4
rotationmeasures,providingthousandsofnewmagnetic-
telescopes will lead to discovery of systems with orbital
fieldsight-linesacrossthediskandhalo. TheSKA-Mid
period shorter than 2 hours and higher eccentricities,
AA* will target the inner spiral arms, while the SKA-
probing larger curvature parameter space in relatively
LowAA*willprobethediffusemagnetismoftheGalac-
shorter observing campaigns. They will also allow for
tic halo and high-latitude sky, extending magnetic map-
more than a factor of two improvement in ToA uncer-
ping to kiloparsec scales.
tainty and an order of magnitude improvement in the
With the full AA4 arrays, the SKAO telescopes will
precision of Post-Keplerian (PK) parameters, even with
deliver a much improved 3D magnetic-field map of the
integration time as small as 30 s. With the AA4 up-
Milky Way. The SKA-Mid AA4 will measure field re-
grade, SKA-Mid will achieve tens-of-nanosecond tim-
versals and small-scale turbulence, and the SKA-Low
ing accuracy, allowing detection of higher-order post-
AA4 will chart the extended halo field.
Newtonian corrections and direct verification of GR’s
predictions for black-hole multipole moments. SKA-
3.8. Pulsar Wind Nebulae (Gelfand et al.)
Low AA4willextendthesearchtotheGalacticperiph-
Pulsar wind nebulae (PWNe) illustrate how neutron
ery, identifying rare systems that complement timing-
stars transfer rotational energy to their surroundings,
array experiments. Combined, these datasets will estab-
producing non-thermal emission across the electromag-
lish SKA as the premier facility for experimental gravi-
netic spectrum. Observations with Chandra, H.E.S.S.,
tation, exploring the limits of Einstein’s theory with un-
and MeerKAT have revealed spectacular structures such
matched precision (Krishnan et al. 2025).
as jets, tori, and bow shocks, but most PWNe remain
unresolved, and their particle acceleration mechanisms 3.10. Probing Neutron Star Interiors and Dense
are not yet fully understood. Matter (Basu et al.)
The SKA-Mid AA* array will provide deep, wide-
Observationsoverthelastdecadehaveestablishedneu-
band imaging and polarization mapping of PWNe, trac-
tron stars as laboratories for ultra-dense matter physics
ing their magnetic topology and energy distribution.
at relatively low temperatures and large proton-neutron
SKA-Low AA* will detect diffuse, low-frequency syn-
asymmetries. NICER and gravitational-wave detections
chrotron emission from older or larger nebulae, captur-
along with radio timing observations of binary neutron
ingrelicpopulationsofrelativisticelectrons. JointSKA-
stars have constrained masses, radii and moment of in-
LowandSKA-Midobservationswillrevealhowmagnetic
ertia. The timing studies of young pulsars have revealed
structure and particle spectra evolve over time.
superfluidity, crustal entrainment and internal coupling.
Atfullcapacity,SKA-MidAA4willresolvefine-scale
Nevertheless, the microphysics of matter above nuclear
features—filaments, shocks, and jets—at sub-arcsecond
saturationdensity—andthetransitionbetweenhadronic
resolution, while SKA-Low AA4 will quantify large-
and exotic phases—remains uncertain.
scale halos and measure depolarization to infer field ge-
The SKA-Mid AA* system will immediately im-
ometry. Together, these data will clarify how pulsar
prove mass and spin measurements by timing massive
winds accelerate particles to PeV energies, their role in
and rapidly rotating pulsars at sub-microsecond preci-
cosmic-ray production, and their feedback on the inter-
sion. The SKA-Low AA* will track glitches and pre-
stellar medium (Gelfand et al. 2025).
cessioneventsalongwithvariationinpropagationdelays
in the inter-stellar medium, providing higher precision
3.9. Testing Gravity with Binary Pulsars
measurements of these quantities. It will also allow us
(Venkatraman Krishnan et al.)
to better characterize the timing noise of these young
Binary pulsars are unique laboratories for testing gen- pulsars, thererby revealing superfluid dynamics within
eral relativity (GR) and alternative theories of gravity neutron-starinteriors. EarlyAA*resultswillnarrowthe
in the strong-field regime. From the orbital decay of the rangeofviableequationsofstate(EoS)andtesttheoret-
Hulse–Taylor pulsar to the double pulsar PSR J0737– icalmodelsofnuclearinteractionsandphasetransitions.
3039A/B, such systems have validated gravitational- At full AA4 sensitivity, the SKA-Mid will enable
wave emission and post-Keplerian dynamics to extraor- high precision moment-of-inertia measurements in rela-
dinary precision. However, only a limited number of tivisticbinariesandexploreframe-draggingeffectslinked
relativistic binaries are known, and pulsar–black-hole to internal structure. The SKA-Low AA4, operating
systems—crucial for probing spacetime curvature and atlowerfrequencies,willcharacterizeglitchrecoveryand
the no-hair theorem—have yet to be discovered. long-term timing noise, probing superfluid vortices and
7
crust elasticity. An observing program resolving rota- ray and the Chinese pulsar timing array or by includ-
tionalvariationsontimescalesfromsecondstoyearswith ing hitherto inaccessible weaker MSPs. The sample will
dynamichighcadenceschedulingnearaglitchforalarge be augmented by new discoveries in the pulsar census
sample of pulsars with AA4 is planned and commensal- (Keaneetal.2025)withtheSKA-MidAA*andSKA-
ity with other observations is recommended. The mass Low AA*. The SKAO PTA will also benefit by better
priorsandgeometric/polarcappriorsaswellasprecision modelling of chromatic effects using wide frequency cov-
radio ephmerides provided by AA4 telescopes will ben- erage provided by both the SKA-Mid and SKA-Low
efit multi-messenger observations with upcoming facili- telescopesapartfrombettercharacterizationofpulsejit-
ties, such as eXTP, New Athena, LISA, Cosmic explorer ter.
and Einstein telescope to provide tight constraints on With the full AA4, the SKA-Mid and SKA-Low
the EoS. Therefore, the SKAO telescopes will provide telescopes will further provide sub-µs precision times-
definitive observational constraints on the EoS and the of-arrival for more than double the number of currently
behaviorofmatteratsupra-nucleardensities(Basuetal. monitored pulsars with a modest use of SKAO telescope
2025). time, largely due to a factor of four times the MeerKAT
sensitivity. The lower observing frequency band of the
3.11. The SKAO Pulsar Timing Array (Shannon et SKA-Low AA4arraywillbettercharacterizethechro-
al.) matic delays, pulse-shape evolution, and DM variability
therebyaccountingforthenoisebudgetmoreaccurately.
The spatial correlation introduced by gravitational
More accurate distance measurements with VLBI mea-
waves (GWs) in the precision timing of an ensemble of
surements using the SKAO telescopes will help in better
millisecondpulsars,orapulsartimingarray(PTA),pro-
localization of individual continuous GW sources (Shan-
vides a complementary view of universe to that seen
non et al. 2025).
in decahertz GWs by terrestrial detectors, such as ad-
vanced LIGO. While a compelling evidence was evident
in decade long data released by the existing PTA ex- SUMMARY
periments two years back, a significant detection – and
Together, these studies define the pulsar and neutron-
indeed understanding the origins of these GWs – is yet
star science programme for the SKA Observatory. The
to happen. In future, PTAs are likely to be able to dis-
AA* arrays will provide an immediate leap in discovery
criminate between an astrophysical or cosmological ori-
power and precision, while the full AA4 configurations
gin of the stochastic gravitational background, validate
of SKA-Low and SKA-Mid will deliver transforma-
and refine hierarchical galaxy evolution models, confirm
tive, population-level insights into neutron-star physics,
or rule out anisotropy in the GW background, set strin-
plasmaastrophysics,Galacticstructure,andgravitation.
gentlimitsonthedipolarGWradiationanddiscriminate
betweenalternativegravitytheorieswitharichdividend
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
for both astrophysics and fundamental physics. This re-
quires extending the current time baseline in the coming The authors acknowledge useful discussion and inputs
decades, as well as increasing the sensitivity of a PTA from Dr Maciej Serylak, Dr Willem van Straten and
experiment. This was the prime aim of pulsar science Dr Lina Levin Preston about the SKAO telescopes and
case for the SKAO telescopes, bringing together gains their sub-systems. BCJ acknowledges the support from
fromsensitivepulsarsurveysandadvancesinpulsarEoS, Raja Ramanna Chair fellowship of the Department of
inter-stellar medium and pulsar emission physics. Atomic Energy, Government of India (RRC - Track I
The SKA-Mid and SKA-Low telescopes would play Grant 3/3401 Atomic Energy Research 00 004 Research
apivotalroleinthisrespect. TheSKA-MidAA*array and Development 27 02 31 1002//2/2023/RRC/R&D-
wouldincreasetheMSPensemblebyeitherextendingthe II/13886 and 1002/2/2023/RRC/R&D-II/14369). MB
time baselines for the currently monitored MSPs at the acknowledgesresourcesfromtheresearchgrant“iPeska”
MeerKAT, Parkes pulsar timing array, North American (PI: Possenti), funded under the INAF national call
Nano-Hertz Gravitational wave Observatory, European Prin-SKA/CTA approved with the Presidential Decree
pulsar timing array, the Indo-Japanese pulsar timing ar- 70/2016.
REFERENCES
Abbate,F.,Chatterjee,S.,Cordes,J.,Demorest,P.,Desvignes, Keane,E.F.,Graber,V.,Levin,L.,Tan,C.M.,Johnson,O.A.,
G.,Eatough,R.P.,Hackmann,E.,etal.(2025). Galactic Ng,C.,Pardo-Araujo,C.,Ronchi,M.,Vohl,D.,Xue,M.,and
centrepulsarswiththeSKAO. Open Journal of Astrophysics. theSKAPulsarScienceWorkingGroup(2025). Asquare
VersionJune13,2025.SKAPulsarScienceWorkingGroup. kilometrearraypulsarcensus. Open Journal of Astrophysics.
Bagchi,M.,Abbate,F.,Balakrishnan,V.,iBernadich,M.C., VersionJune15,2025.Preprinttypesetusingopenjournalstyle.
Bhattacharyya,B.,Dutta,A.,Freire,P.C.C.,etal.(2025). Kramer,M.andStappers,B.(2015). PulsarSciencewiththe
PulsarsinglobularclusterswiththeSKAO. Open Journal of SKA. InAdvancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre
Astrophysics. VersionJune18,2025.SKAPulsarScience Array (AASKA14),page36.
WorkingGroup. Krishnan,V.V.,Shao,L.,Balakrishnan,V.,iBernadich,M.C.,
Basu,A.,Graber,V.,Lower,M.E.,Antonelli,M.,Antonopoulou, Carleo,A.,Corongiu,A.,Deller,A.,etal.(2025). Testing
D.,Bagchi,M.,Char,P.,etal.(2025). Probingneutronstar gravitywithbinarypulsarsintheSKAera. Open Journal of
interiorsandthepropertiesofcoldultra-densematterwiththe Astrophysics. VersionJuly5,2025.SKAPulsarScience
SKAO. Open Journal of Astrophysics. VersionJune16,2025. WorkingGroup.
SKAPulsarScienceWorkingGroup. Levin,L.,Bagchi,M.,Burgay,M.,Deller,A.T.,Graber,V.,
Gelfand,J.D.,Ng,C.-Y.,Posselt,B.,Roberts,M.S.E., Igoshev,A.,Kramer,M.,Lorimer,D.,Posselt,B.,etal.(2025).
Bhattacharyya,S.,Dai,S.,Breton,R.,etal.(2025). UnderstandingtheneutronstarpopulationwiththeSKAO
UnderstandingpulsarwindnebulaewiththeSKAO. Open telescopes. Open Journal of Astrophysics. VersionJune24,
Journal of Astrophysics. VersionJune16,2025.SKAPulsar 2025.SKAOPulsarScienceWorkingGroup.
ScienceWorkingGroup.
8
Oswald,L.S.,Basu,A.,Chakraborty,M.,Joshi,B.C., Xu,J.,Han,J.L.,Jing,W.,andtheSKAPulsarScience
Lewandowska,N.,Liu,K.,Lower,M.E.,etal.(2025). WorkingGroup(2025). Exploringmagneticfieldstructureof
UnderstandingpulsarmagnetosphereswiththeSKAO. Open themilkywaywiththeSKAO. Open Journal of Astrophysics.
Journal of Astrophysics. VersionJuly16,2025.SKAPulsar VersionJune14,2025.NationalAstronomicalObservatories,
ScienceWorkingGroup. ChineseAcademyofSciences.
Shannon,R.M.,Bhat,N.D.R.,Chalumeau,A.,Chen,S.,
Cromartie,H.T.,Gopukumar,A.,etal.(2025). TheSKAO
pulsartimingarray. Open Journal of Astrophysics. Version
June16,2025.SKAPulsarScienceWorkingGroup.
Tiburzi,C.,Lam,M.T.,Reardon,D.J.,Porayko,N.K.,Mevius,
M.,Ocker,S.K.,Susarla,S.C.,etal.(2025). Exploringthe
galacticplasmawithpulsarsintheSKAera. Open Journal of
Astrophysics. VersionJune26,2025.SKAPulsarScience
WorkingGroup.
provides fast and easy peer review for new papers in the
astro-phsectionofthearXiv,makingthereviewingpro-
This paper was built using the Open Journal of As- cess simpler for authors and referees alike. Learn more
trophysics LATEX template. The OJA is a journal which at http://astro.theoj.org.
