Resolving the Nature of the
Energetic Cosmos
0202
raM
01
]EH.hp-ortsa[
1v26940.3002:viXra
Science with the X-ray Imaging and
Spectroscopy Mission
This white paper was prepared by members of the XRISM Science
Team for the benefit of the general astronomical community. This
paper describes the capabilities of XRISM, offers a sampling of the
many science topics that the mission will address, and discusses
the synergies of XRISM with the plethora of planned and existing
facilities in the 2020s and beyond.
http://xrism.isas.jaxa.jp
Science with XRISM
1 Introduction 1
2 GALAXY AND CLUSTER EVOLUTION 3
2.1 Dynamics of the most energetic events in the Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 The Physics of Black Holes and Active Galactic Nuclei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 Chemical Composition and Evolution in the Universe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.4 Dark Matter Emission Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3 DIFFUSE GAS IN LOCAL ENVIRONMENTS 9
3.1 Missing Baryons and the WHIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.2 Absorption in the ISM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.3 Dust Scattering and Haloes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.4 The Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.5 Charge Exchange in the Solar System and Beyond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 PHYSICS AND DYNAMICS OF COSMIC PLASMAS 13
4.1 Velocity Field of Intracluster Plasma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Shocks in Clusters and Elsewhere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3 Plasma Diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5 FORMATION AND EVOLUTION OF COMPACT OBJECTS 17
5.1 Winds from Compact Galactic Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2 Surface Redshifts from Massive White Dwarfs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3 High-mass X-ray Binaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4 Ultra-luminous X-ray Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.5 Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6 THE LIVES AND DEATHS OF STARS 21
6.1 Star Formation and the Cold/Hot ISM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2 Supernovae and their Remnants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3 Exoplanets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7 XRISM IN THE LANDSCAPE OF 2020s ASTRONOMY 27
7.1 Independent Measurements of Black Hole Spin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2 The Disk-Wind-Jet Connection in Galactic Black Holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.3 Dust Scattering Halos and Molecular Clouds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.4 Following Extreme Transients in Time Domain Surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7.5 Galactic Outflows and the Startburst-AGN Connection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.6 AGN Feedback in Clusters of Galaxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.7 Particle Acceleration in Large-Scale Plasmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7.8 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8 Acknowledgements 31
i
Science with XRISM
1 Introduction
The X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission (XRISM), formerly known as the X-ray Astron-
omy Recovery Mission (XARM), is a JAXA-NASA collaborative mission with ESA participation.
XRISM will offer non-dispersive, high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy in the soft X-ray bandpass
(∼ 0.3−12 keV), while offering complementary CCD imaging resolution over a wide field of view.
The primary purpose of the mission is to recover the science that was lost after the Astro-H/Hitomi
mission failed in 2016, approximately one month after launch. Four science categories have been
defined for XRISM: (1) Structure formation of the Universe and evolution of clusters of galaxies;
(2) Circulation history of baryonic matter in the Universe; (3) Transport and circulation of energy
in the Universe; (4) New science with unprecedented high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy. A full
description of the mission is provided in an SPIE proceeding1; the reader is referred there for more
detail.
Figure1: ThemissionrequirementsforboththeXRISMResolveinstrumentandtheHitomiSoftX-raySpectrometer
(SXS), along with the on-orbit performance of the Hitomi mission as measured in 2016. Hitomi met or exceeded
requirements in all areas.
XRISM represents a revolutionary leap forward in X-ray spectroscopy. With a spectral resolu-
tion 20-40 times better than the CCD instruments that are used on Chandra, XMM-Newton, and
Suzaku, as well as a substantially increased collecting area and bandpass over the grating instru-
ments on those missions, XRISM represents a new tool for studying the universe, and will enable
science never before possible. XRISM will do this using two instruments:
• Resolve, a soft X-ray spectrometer with a constant < 7 eV FWHM spectral resolution over
the entire bandpass. Resolve has a field of view of 2.9(cid:48)×2.9(cid:48) over an array consisting of a 6×6
pixelX-raymicrocalorimeter(pixelsare30”insize). Thearrayhasanoperatingtemperature
of 50 mK, and must be cooled by a multi-stage adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator. This
system can operate in both cryogen and cryogen-free modes, meaning that the mission can
continue to operate after the exhaustion of the liquid helium cryogen supply. The mission
requirements for Resolve are given in Figure 1, along with the measured values from the
in-flight performance of Hitomi (all of which exceeded requirements).
• Xtend, a soft X-ray imager providing simultaneous coverage of the Resolve field and the sur-
roundings over a 38(cid:48)×38(cid:48) field of view. Xtend will provide CCD-quality imaging spectroscopy
1
Science with XRISM
similar to that available on Suzaku (energy resolution < 250 eV at 6 keV), with ∼ 1(cid:48) spatial
resolution.
In Figure 2, we show the Hitomi SXS instrument, mounted in the calorimeter spectrometer
insert. The XRISM instrument is currently in production, but will be identical to this. The pixels
in the detector measure the heat imparted by incoming X-ray photons (only a fraction of a degree,
hence the need for the detector to be cooled to such a low temperature). From this temperature
change, the energy of the incoming X-ray photon can be calculated.
Figure 2: The Hitomi Soft X-ray Spectrometer, photographed prior to launch of that mission in 2016. XRISM’s
Resolve instrument will be identical.
XRISM is particularly well-suited to the astrophysical analysis of extended objects, such as
galaxy clusters and supernova remnants. Because the light is not dispersed, spatial information
about these sources is not lost as it often is in observations with the gratings on Chandra or
XMM-Newton. Resolve features an exceptionally low background of ∼ 1 count day−1 10 eV−1. As
an example of this, in the Hitomi spectrum of the Perseus Cluster shown in Figure 3, there are
∼ 21,000 counts in the Fe Kα complex shown; of these, only 16 counts are due to the background.
XRISM is planned for launch in 2022 from Tanegashima Space Center, aboard a JAXA HII-A
rocket to an orbital altitude of 550 km and an inclination of 31 degrees. Two identical X-ray
Mirror Assemblies (one for Resolve and one for Xtend), each with 203 nested circular foils in both
the primary and secondary mirrors, focus X-rays onto the focal plane detectors at the base of the
spacecraft, 5.6 meters away. The mirrors have an angular resolution of order 1(cid:48).
In this white paper, we give a brief introduction to the science that will be enabled by XRISM.
This work is by no means exhaustive. A more full description of the scientific topics presented here
can be found in a collection of 17 white papers written in 2014, prior to the launch of Hitomi 1.
This white paper serves as a summary of those more detailed white papers, with the important
1https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/hitomi/about/paper list.html
2
Science with XRISM
inclusion of science learned from Hitomi and a more timely description of XRISM in the landscape
of astronomy in the 2020s.
2 GALAXY AND CLUSTER EVOLUTION
(Primary editors: Irina Zhuravleva, Erin Kara, Chris Done)
Oneofthebiggestquestionsinmodernastrophysicsandcosmologyishowthelargeststructures
in the Universe form and evolve with time. As a result of enormous efforts in observational and
theoretical astrophysics, we now understand what processes are playing an important role in the
evolution of galaxies, groups, and clusters. However, the physics of the involved processes and the
dynamical and chemical structure of the largest objects and their environments are still not well
understood.
MostofthevisiblematterintheUniverseisintheformofhot,X-rayemittinggaswithinmassive
galaxies, groups, and clusters of galaxies as well as in the interstellar and intergalactic gas between
them. X-ray observations have provided spectacular high-resolution images of these objects. These
data revealed a wealth of structures associated with various complex physical processes that take
place in these environments. With XRISM, we will be able to resolve individual spectral lines
and trace gas motions through the Doppler broadening and line energy shifts in many galaxies
and clusters of galaxies. We will robustly measure the chemical composition, multi-temperature
structure, and ionization state of the hot gas.
Figure 3: Left: Chandra X-ray image of the Perseus cluster core, filtered to emphasize structures in the hot gas2.
Right: spectrum from the Perseus core (white square in the left panel) observed with Hitomi’s microcalorimeter
(black) and Suzaku’s CCD imaging spectrometer (red). XRISM will provide similar high-resolution spectra in the
0.3−12 keV band for extended X-ray sources3.
Inthischapter, webrieflyreviewthekeyXRISMsciencerelatedtotheevolutionofgalaxiesand
clusters, physics of active galactic nuclei (AGN) and AGN feedback as well as the chemical compo-
sitionandevolutionoflarge-scalestructure. Adetaileddescriptionandsimulationsofastrophysical
sources can be found in the Astro-H white paper4.
2.1 Dynamics of the most energetic events in the Universe
Clustersofgalaxies-thelargestandmostmassivestructuresintheUniverse-areformedhierarchi-
cally via a sequence of mergers and accretion of surrounding matter, including smaller clusters and
galaxy groups. These processes drive shocks in the intracluster medium (ICM), trigger bulk and
turbulent motions of the gas, and channel energy into magnetic fields and relativistic particles5;6.
3
Science with XRISM 2.1 Dynamics of the most energetic events in the Universe
On smaller scales, an interaction between the energy generated by the accretion of matter onto a
supermassive black hole (SMBH) and gas in the host galaxy (AGN feedback) takes place. Even a
small fraction of the energy produced in the vicinity of a black hole and transferred to the gas has
a profound effect on the host galaxy and cluster evolution7;6;8. XRISM will probe the kinematics
of such complex and energetic processes for the first time, transforming our “static,” single-frame
view of these processes into a full dynamic picture.
Dynamics of violent mergers. Mergers of galaxy clusters are the most energetic events in
the Universe since the Big Bang, with the total kinetic energy of colliding clusters reaching 1065
ergs9. The hot intracluster gas that fills the gravitational potential wells of clusters is strongly
affected by these collisions and can be traced with X-ray observations.
Strong shocks, bulk motions of the gas, and turbulence dissipate energy from collisions, heating
thegastoveryhightemperatures. Shockshavebeenrobustlydetectedinahandfulofclustersusing
high-resolutionX-rayimages10;11;12;13;14;15;16. However,thedominantenergyconversionmechanism
- via bulk motions of the gas and turbulence - has never been measured. Resolve will provide such
measurementsinmanymergersatdifferentstagesthankstoitssuperbspectralresolution. Combin-
ingthisvelocityinformationwithotherexistingdata(X-ray, optical, sub-mm,radio)andnumerical
simulations, wewillbeabletoreconstructthegeometriesanddynamicalstagesofmergingsystems.
Furthermore, the large field of view of Xtend (a factor of ∼ 2.2 larger than Chandra/ACIS-I) will
provide complementary measurements of radial profiles of X-ray surface brightness, gas density,
and temperature up to large radii.
Mergersareoftenaccompaniedby“coldfronts”(e.g.,A2319,A3667,A754)thatappearassharp
contact discontinuities in the X-ray surface brightness. Cold fronts arise either from subcluster
stripping by ram pressure or from “sloshing” of the low-entropy gas in a disturbed gravitational
potential well17;18;10;19;20;21;22;23. In the case of gas stripping, bulk motions of the subclusters are
mostly in the plane of the sky, while in the sloshing case, there is a near-sonic flow along the line
of sight inside the front. Resolve will measure both bulk and turbulent motions of the gas in such
cold fronts, providing a solid basis for probing the microphysics of the ICM using cold fronts.
Many merging clusters host giant diffuse radio halos filled with relativistic particles. These
particles emit synchrotron radiation in the cluster magnetic field24, rapidly losing their energy and
mixing with the thermal plasma on length-scales well below the sizes of radio halos. Therefore,
in order to explain the observed extent of these halos, particles have to be constantly accelerated
in situ. One way to accelerate particles is by scattering on magnetosonic waves produced by
turbulence25. Resolve observations will test the theories of cosmic-ray acceleration by tracing
turbulence in regions within clusters that have strong radio emission.
Precise mass measurements and cluster cosmology. Knowing masses of galaxy clusters
at different redshifts, we can trace the growth of structures over time and constrain cosmological
models. This is usually done through measurements of cluster mass function, which decreases
exponentially at the high-mass end. This exponential “tail” is very sensitive to the dark energy
density parameter and provides a way to infer the role of dark energy in cosmic expansion26;27.
The precision of cluster cosmology depends on the accuracy of the mass measurements. One of
the most important ways of measuring cluster masses is based on the assumption that the thermal
pressurealonesupportsthehotgasagainstthecluster’sgravity(hydrostaticequilibrium). However,
numerical simulations show that the macroscopic motions of the gas may provide significant non-
thermal pressure support, up to 25-30 % at r 28;29;30;31;32;33. Hitomi observations of the Perseus
200
core, whichisdominatedbythecentralmassivegalaxyNGC1275, showedthatthekineticpressure
islessthan10%ofthethermalpressureonscalessof60kpc3. XRISMwillcontinueHitomi’slegacy
by measuring velocities of gas motions and the non-thermal pressure contribution with an accuracy
of a few percent in many relaxed, bright galaxy clusters (Fig. 4). Velocity measurements up to
4
Science with XRISM 2.2 The Physics of Black Holes and Active Galactic Nuclei
∼r , for even a small sample of nearby relaxed clusters, will significantly improve the constraints
2500
on dark energy and other cosmological parameters.
Figure 4: An illustration of XRISM reconstructing radial profiles of the velocity of gas motions. Left: XMM-
Newton image of A2199 and 3(cid:48) ×3(cid:48) XRISM pointing regions (green boxes) up to r (dashed circle). Middle:
2500
the input (solid line) and recovered (points) velocity dispersion in A2199. Black points: simultaneous fitting of the
spectra from all annuli; red crosses: separately fitting the spectrum in each annulus. Errors are at 90% confidence.
Adapted from4. Right: Measurements of gas velocity dispersion as a function of radius based on the mock data
of a relaxed galaxy cluster from cosmological simulations. Curves: true velocity dispersion from simulations; points:
recovered dispersion from the mock Resolve spectra. Adapted from34.
Physics of cool cores and mechanical AGN feedback. SMBHs residing in galaxy clus-
ters35 are preventing strong cooling and vigorous star formation in their host galaxies through
feedback processes36;37;7. These processes include the inflation and rise of bubbles of relativistic
particles, generation of shocks and sound waves, uplift of cooler, multi-phase gas, and turbulence
and other motions of the gas38;39;40;41;42;43;44;45;46;47;48.
Resolve will perform comprehensive velocity diagnostics in the regions dominated by AGN
feedback physics in the brightest cool-core clusters. Such measurements will address the role of
turbulence in cooling-heating balance and metal mixing. In nearby objects like the Virgo cluster
(Figure 5), Resolve will measure the kinetic energy associated with AGN-injected bubbles and
uplifted gas filaments.
2.2 The Physics of Black Holes and Active Galactic Nuclei
XRISMwillrevolutionizehowweunderstandaccretingSMBHs, startingfromhowcoldgasflowsin
from the interstellar medium (ISM) of the galaxy, down to the inner accretion flow where matter is
affected by the strong gravity of the black hole. This gravitational inflow leads to massive outflows,
whichmaybepowerfulenoughtopreventgasfromcoolingtoformstars,thusaffectingtheevolution
of the host galaxy. X-ray continuum emission is produced within a few gravitational radii of the
central black hole and irradiates the remaining infalling or outflowing gas (e.g., the accretion disk,
broad-line region clouds or the dusty torus), producing a plethora of emission features, known
colloquially as the reflection spectrum. The Fe Kα line is the most commonly used diagnostic of
the structure around the AGN because iron is an abundant element and this line grouping appears
in a relatively isolated region of the spectrum. XRISM will provide an unprecedented view of this
important spectral feature. The combination of improved sensitivity and better spectral resolution
will enable XRISM results to be extended to large samples of objects.
Black hole spin through observations of broad, ionized reflection: Japan’s ASCA
5
Science with XRISM 2.2 The Physics of Black Holes and Active Galactic Nuclei
Figure 5: Spatially and spectrally resolving AGN feedback with XRISM. Left: Chandra X-ray image of the core
regionoftheVirgocluster(dominatedbythecentralgalaxyM87)dividedbyaspherically-symmetricmodelofsurface
brightness. The image highlights the complexity of structures in the gas produced by the AGN feedback42;49. Each
whitebox(3(cid:48)×3(cid:48))showsthefieldofviewofResolve. Tworegionsarepointedatthecoolandbrightstructures,one
attheshockandanotheroneatthecenterofM87. Right: a100kssimulatedResolvespectrumofoneoftheregions
with outflows (left box) in M87. The spectrum shows the contributions from the different thermal components to
the Fe L line complex. Adapted and updated from4.
satellite opened a new field in X-ray astronomy with the discovery of the broad Fe Kα line in
MCG−6-30-1550. The implication of the broad line is immense, as it may provide a way of mea-
suring an elusive fundamental parameter of a black hole: its spin51. As such, the broad Fe Kα
line has ignited healthy debate and continued interest52. Rapid time variability, X-ray reverbera-
tion mapping53;54, and quasar microlensing55 indicate that the broad Fe Kα line is produced by
reprocessing off the inner accretion disk within ∼ 10R , but the details of the inner disk radius and
g
kinematics of the flow are still highly debated. By disentangling contributions from other spectral
features (including narrow emission from the outer disk and/or torus, or absorption though ionized
outflows along our line of sight), we can confidently probe properties of the inner accretion flow
to make a clean estimate of the black hole spin. XRISM will give us a clear understanding of
how much material is actually making it to the black hole and how much material is being re-
moved through massive outflows (see the case study of MCG−6-30-15 in Figure 6). Furthermore,
the combined use of Resolve and Xtend will allow for complementary measurements of the short
light-travel time delays associated with the relativistically broadened Fe Kα emission line (known
as X-ray reverberation).
Outer disk/torus structure through observations of narrow, neutral reflection: A
narrow Fe line at 6.4 keV is nearly ubiquitous in AGN spectra. It is due to neutral Fe Kα fluo-
rescence off circumnuclear optically-thick material, but its physical association with, for example,
the dusty torus that may serve as a gas reservoir to the disk, or the outer edge of the accretion
disk, is still not fully understood. Hitomi observed 1 AGN, the low-luminosity AGN NGC 1275
at the center of the Perseus Cluster, and found a narrow Fe Kα line, with a 500-1600 km s−1
width that suggests it is associated with a molecular torus extending tens to hundreds of parsecs56.
XRISM will extend these studies to a large sample of AGN, spanning a range of mass accretion
rates. This is important, as Seyfert galaxies observed with Chandra High-Energy Transmission
Grating (HETG) suggest higher-velocity structure in the Fe Kα line, placing the Fe K emitting
region within the optical broad line region57;58. Moreover, recent advances using 3rd-order spectra
from Chandra HETG find that the narrow Fe Kα line in one Seyfert 1 galaxy NGC 4151 is, in
6
Science with XRISM 2.3 Chemical Composition and Evolution in the Universe
XRISM/
XRISM
(i=5°)
(i=75°)
Figure 6: Left: Fe Kα line profile of MCG−6-30-15 as seen in 300 ks by XMM-Newton pn (blue) and Chandra
HETGS (green), along with a Resolve simulation in red. Middle: The ratio of the XMM pn spectrum to a power-
law model fit between 2–4 keV and 7.5–10 keV. The pn spectrum can be equally well described by pure relativistic
reflectionwithaninclinationof5deg(asshowninblue)orbyrelativisticreflectionwithaninclinationof75degwith
additionalemissionandabsorption,includinganultrafastoutflowofv ∼0.13c(asshowninred). Right: XRISM
out
will easily distinguish between these two scenarios, as the narrow emission and absorption will be resolved.
fact, asymmetrically broadened, suggestive of Doppler shifts and weak gravitational effects59. This
allows for determination of both the radius and inclination of the narrow Fe Kα emitting region. In
this one tantalizing case, the outer and inner disk inclinations do not match, which might suggest a
change in the vertical scale height of the disk at large radii due to radiation pressure. Interestingly,
similar interpretations of changes in vertical disk structure have also been suggested60 to explain
intensive disk reverberation mapping of NGC 415161.
2.3 Chemical Composition and Evolution in the Universe
The chemical make-up of the universe represents the sum of billions of past supernovae. In contrast
to stellar systems, H II regions, or planetary nebulae, gas in the ICM is largely free of the effects of
optical depth, extinction, and non-equilibrium ionization. In such a physical environment, robust
measurements of chemical enrichment can be done with the high-resolution spectra from Resolve,
providing valuable insights into the production of heavy elements by early stellar populations.
Chemical composition of bright nearby galaxies and galaxy clusters. All elements
between C and Zn show emission lines between 0.1 and 10 keV in spectra of galaxy clusters.
Resolve will measure the abundances of the α-elements and Fe with remarkable accuracy of a few
percentinnearbycool-coreclusters. Thesemeasurementsalonealreadyprovidetightconstraintson
the mechanisms that produce these chemical elements62;63;64;65. With sufficiently long exposures,
ResolvewilldetectweaklinesfromrareelementsintheICM,suchasNa,Al,Cr,andMn(Figure7).
Al and Na are sensitive tracers of the metallicity of the underlying stellar population, while Cr and
Mn can be used to probe the characteristics (including metallicity) of SNIa progenitors, resulting
in a wealth of information about the chemical enrichment history of the ICM and the Universe.
Outsidetheregionsdominatedbythecentralbrightestclustergalaxy, metallicitymeasurements
will be important for constraining the chemical evolution driven by the remaining cluster member
galaxies, whichmayhavewitnessedadifferentstarformationhistoryovercosmictime. Bymeasur-
ing metal abundances in galaxies and groups of galaxies, XRISM will further investigate the mass
dependence of the chemical enrichment history4.
Hitomi observations of the Perseus core confirmed the power of high-resolution spectroscopy:
the Cr/Fe, Mn/Fe and Ni/Fe ratios were measured accurately for the first time (Figure 7). This
7
Science with XRISM 2.3 Chemical Composition and Evolution in the Universe
Hitomi/SXS
Astro-H/XRISM/Resolve Perseus cluster
Virgo cluster
Hitomi/SXS
Perseus cluster
Figure 7: Left: XRISMsimulatedspectrum(black)ofthecoreofM87asobservedwith100ksandthebest-fitting
model (red). Adapted from4 Right: Hitomi spectrum from the core of the Perseus cluster. Broad-band spectrum
is shown on the top panel (note that the gate valve was in place during the observation and it absorbs most X-rays
below∼2keV),whilethezoomed-inonthehigh-energyendspectrumisshowninthebottompanel. Thebest-fitting
model is shown in red. Hitomi resolved individual lines in the spectrum (black vs. blue points)66.
measurement revealed that these elements have a near-solar abundance ratio. Comparison with
the nucleosynthesis calculations disfavoured the scenario of the SNIa progenitors being exclusively
white dwarfs with masses below the Chandrasekhar limit66. Combining Hitomi measurements
with XMM-Newton RGS grating spectra at lower energies yielded reliable measurements of the
abundances of O, Ne, Mg, Si, S, Ar, Ca, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Ni, which were used to further test
existing SN nucleosynthesis calculations. These results showed, in particular, that core-collapse
supernova (CCSN) yield calculations with included neutrino physics improve the agreement with
the observed pattern of α-elements67.
Chemical evolution in high-redshift Universe. Tracing the star formation at different
redshifts is directly connected to the chemical evolution of the Universe, so measuring abundances
of different elements at high redshifts is crucial. Based on models of galaxy formation, the relative
population of massive stars, and consequently the rate of CCSN, is thought to increase in the
high-redshift Universe. The ratio of abundances of Fe and light alpha-elements like O, Mg, and Si
can check this prediction. Current measurements do not show any clear evidences of the Fe/Mg
evolution68, however, the observed scatter at high redshift is large.
It will be possible to observe high redshift clusters with XRISM with sufficiently long exposures
(≥100ks). FeasibilitystudiesshowedthattheFeabundancewillbemeasuredwitha5σsignificance
with a 100 ks exposure out to z = 1 clusters. Si abundance can be probed up to z = 0.6, while O
only feasible for a few systems up to z = 0.3−0.44.
Another way to probe high-z chemical composition is to study absorption lines imprinted by
the circumgalactic and intergalactic media in the spectra of bright background beacons such as
the X-ray afterglows of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) and distant blazars. XRISM will resolve these
absorption features, allowing a study of the intervening warm-hot intergalactic medium (WHIM).
XRISM will also detect emission lines in GRB spectra, which are important for probing the high-z
8
Science with XRISM 2.4 Dark Matter Emission Lines
environment of GRB progenitors69.
2.4 Dark Matter Emission Lines
Using stacked spectra from dozens of galaxy clusters at different redshifts, both XMM-newton and
Chandra detected a weak unidentified emission line at around 3.55 ±0.03 keV (cluster frame)70. A
similar feature was found in XMM-Newton spectra of M31 and the Perseus cluster71, and several
later works reported detections from the Milky Way. While the nature of this feature is not known,
an intriguing possibility is that it could be the decay line from sterile neutrinos — a dark matter
candidate — with a mass of 7.1 keV. All these results relied on the low spectral resolution of CCD
spectrometers. The70 result found a much stronger signal from the Perseus cluster compared to
that from the stacked cluster sample. In 2016, Hitomi observations of the Perseus cluster did not
detect the line at the high flux reported by70, though the statistics were limited72. While faint line
detections in any single source using a relatively poor CCD resolution are susceptible to systematic
andcalibrationuncertainties(andthePerseusclusterdetectionmayhavebeenanexampleofthat),
the stacked-cluster signal70 is more robust with respect to the various instrumental effects. It has
not been verified with high spectral resolution thus far. Combining all cluster observations with
XRISM over several years will offer the chance to detect this possible signal from dark matter
decay.
3 DIFFUSE GAS IN LOCAL ENVIRONMENTS
(Primary editors: L´ıa Corrales, Elisa Costantini)
3.1 Missing Baryons and the WHIM
Current observations of hot gas in galaxy clusters, the Local Group, and the warm intergalactic
medium (IGM) indicate that 20-40% of the baryons seen in the high-z Universe are ?missing?
from our observations at z=073;74. The missing baryons are suspected to occupy the filaments of
gas between galaxies at temperatures > 106 K: also known as the WHIM. The dominant ions with
emission and absorption features in the X-ray band are O VII, O VIII, and Ne IX. Measurements
of the O VII resonant absorption line at 21.6 ˚A arising from the WHIM have been reported, but
all to < 5σ threshold. Additionally, there is confusion as to whether the absorption seen so far
corresponds to the IGM or to material within the Local Group73. Recent work gave evidence for O
VII absorption in the bright X-ray blazar 1ES 1553+113, from z=0.43 and 0.35, offering a tentative
detection for the hot WHIM that accounts for 9-40% of the baryons75.
XRISM will study potential emission of the WHIM from the outskirts of more extended cluster
regions (e.g., at distances more than two times the virial radius) in objects such as the Coma
cluster76, Abell 8577, and Abell 221878;79. XRISM will also measure the baryon fraction in gas-
poor groups, big ellipticals or massive spirals, making it better able to characterize the thermal
state and metal abundance of gas emission from lower mass structures in the Universe.
3.2 Absorption in the ISM
While only about 1% of the ISM is condensed into solid dust particles, dust imprints unique
extinction features in the spectra of background X-ray sources. The extinction features of Si, Mg,
O,andFehavebeenstudiedindetailwithcurrentX-raymissions80;81;82;83;84;85. Theseelementsare
the main constituents of silicates, which, together with carbon, dominate the chemical composition
9
Science with XRISM 3.2 Absorption in the ISM
Figure 8: Left: A 50 ks Resolve simulation of the Si K edge for a source with N =2×1022 cm−2. Right: a 200
H
ks simulation of the Fe K edge for a source with N =8.5×1022 cm−2.
H
ofinterstellardust. Throughhigh-resolutionX-rayspectroscopy, ithasbecomeclearthattheX-ray
band offers a privileged point of view on the properties of interstellar dust.
The features caused by dust are due to the interaction between the incoming X-ray and the
electrons inside the grain, which form an interference pattern, depending on the energy of elec-
trons and the complexity of the compound. These features are not only sensitive to the chemical
composition of the intervening dust, but potentially to the grain size86 and its crystallinity80;81.
Due to UV radiation and cosmic rays, dust is believed to undergo a process of amorphization.
Accordingtoinfraredstudies, nomorethan2%ofdustshouldsurviveincrystallineform. However,
X-ray features are sensitive to short-range order in the grain, while the infrared features map long
range order87. This allows X-rays to be more sensitive to the crystalline fraction in a complex
structure, where amorphous and crystalline lattice coexist. Recent X-ray studies suggest that the
crystalline fraction could be up to 12%81. The study of a single feature in the X-ray spectrum can
reveal details about dust in different Galactic environments that are elusive at longer wavelengths.
XRISM will open a new parameter space with the investigation of the dense environments of
the Galaxy (N = 1−10×1022 cm−2) near the Galactic Center or molecular clouds. Figure 8
H
shows a 50 ks simulation of the spectrum in the Si K edge region (E ∼ 1.84 keV), highlighting
the impact of different grain composition and distributions. XRISM offers also the advantage of a
negligible contamination by silicon in the detector itself. With XRISM we will be able to compare
the spectral features of interstellar dust – especially for heavier elements such as Ca, S, and Fe
– to material absorption measured in the lab. In addition, dust scattering produces a feature on
the low-energy side of the absorption cross-section that results in an apparent spectral peak. The
height of this peak directly measures the abundance of large grains (> 0.3 µm) and will allow
XRISM to evaluate departures from the standard dust size distribution88;89.
In Figure 8 we also show the simulation of the Fe K edge at 7.1 keV90. The Fe K edge will be
detected only for environments with N > 8×1022 cm−2. Persistently bright sources with a high
H
column density are not frequent in our Galaxy, so the limiting factor in an accurate study of the
feature will be the signal to noise ratio91. XRISM will be able to distinguish between gas and dust
absorption, offering a measure of depletion and abundance of iron in regions that are too absorbed
to be observed at other wavelengths.
Large column densities will increase the opacities of less abundant elements, like S and Ca92.
In every ISM environment, Ca is completely depleted. It is believed that Ca, together with Al,
is at the core of silicate grains. The silicate themselves would create a shielding mantle against
10
Science with XRISM 3.3 Dust Scattering and Haloes
radiation in the ISM, keeping the Ca and Al in dust form in every environment. XRISM will be
able to identify absorption by silicates containing Ca and Al even if absorption by this element
produces a transmission of only 1-2%.
3.3 Dust Scattering and Haloes
ecruos
/
olah
Fe L shell
O K shell
ecruos
/
olah
Small angle forward scattering of X-ray
light by interstellar dust grains leads to
the phenomenon of dust scattering ha-
los, an extended X-ray image spanning
10-20 arcminutes from a bright central
source93;94;95. When a compact object
exhibits a bright X-ray outburst, this
phenomenon manifests as bright rings of
X-raylightthatgrowinangularsizewith
time,referredtoasdustringechoes. The
time and spectral information available
with dust ring echoes allows for a de-
convolution of the intervening dust loca-
tionrelativetothepointsource, thelight
curve of the outburst, and the dust grain
size distribution96;97.
Like the high-resolution absorption
featuresdiscussedpreviously,thescatter-
Figure 9: Ratio of the scattering halo component to the point ing cross-section will also exhibit high-
source component. The X-ray scattering fine structure models resolution signatures of dust composi-
for Fe L and O K (before applying the telescope response) are
tion. The spectrum of a dust scattering
shown in orange.
halo is also sensitive to the composition
and elements bound up in dust grains of radius ∼ 0.3 − 3 µm, which cannot be probed at any
other wavelength. This may be related to the “missing oxygen problem,” which arises from the
fact that along the most highly depleted sight-lines, more oxygen is observed to be missing from
the gas phase than can be explained by its incorporation into silicates98. This could be explained if
oxygen is bound up in large micron-scale ice grains, which also prevents them from being detected
via infrared spectroscopy. Due to shielding, large dust grains are also hidden from X-ray absorp-
tion99. Thus, high-resolution spectra of X-ray scattering halos in combination with high-resolution
absorption features from the spectrum of the central point source are necessary for a full picture
of interstellar dust composition (Figure 9).
Resolve offers the opportunity to study the properties of dust in individual clouds in the ISM.
This arises from the fact that dust scattering halos and ring echo images exhibit asymmetries
causedbyeitherenhancedscatteringfromdistantclouds100orenhancedabsorptionfromforeground
clouds96. The Xtend instrument can be used to track the evolution of dust ring echoes, providing
essential timing information that will identify the location of the interstellar clouds. XRISM will
be an essential observatory for tracking processes of dust destruction and growth across various
phases of the ISM, and will provide complementary datasets to the infrared spectra obtained by
JWST.
3.4 The Galactic Center
11
Science with XRISM 3.5 Charge Exchange in the Solar System and Beyond
One of the most interesting phenom-
ena in the center of the Milky Way
is the Galactic Center X-ray Emission
(GCXE). The GCXE consists of diffuse
plasma with a spectrum characterized
by strong atomic lines (Si to Ni, espe-
cially Fe). Only 10-40% of the GCXE
is resolved in point sources even by long-
exposureChandraobservations102;103;104.
Recently, Suzaku105 revealed that the
spectrum of the GCXE cannot be re-
constructed by the assembly of well-
known point sources (magnetic or non-
magnetic cataclysmic variable and active
binaries). In addition, Chandra104 shows Figure 10: Simulated spectra of the GCXE (the Radio Arc
the equivalent widths of Fe K lines of region). Upper panel is for the case of narrow Fe XXV K line
the integrated spectrum of point sources (point source origin) line. Lower panel is same as the upper
panel, but the Fe XXV K line is expanding with the velocity of
in the GC region, and they are differ-
500 km/s (diffuse plasma origin101).
ent from those of the GCXE shown by
Suzaku106;105. These facts indicate that
the majority of the GCXE might come from truly diffuse hot plasma.
With XRISM, we can measure the Doppler shift of and line broadening of the Fe XXV K line
in the GCXE with accuracies of 45 km s−1 and 300 km s−1, respectively. If the majority of the
GCXE is diffuse plasma of kT ∼ 7 keV (T ∼ 8×107 K), then it is not gravitationally bound to the
GC region, and thus the rotation curve of the GCXE can be different from that in the radio band.
In the case of a point source origin, narrow line broadening is expected, in contrast to expanding
diffuse plasma101 (see Figure 10).
The non-thermal component characterized by the Fe I Kα line is thought to be an X-ray
echo from molecular clouds (MCs) irradiated by past X-rays from Sgr A*107. The detection of
the Compton shoulder of the Fe I Kα line by XRISM will constrain the positions and physical
properties of the irradiated MCs108. On the other hand, Suzaku109;105 found that some fraction
of Fe I Kα in the Galactic disk region is not from the integration of faint point sources, but from
low-energy (keV-MeV) cosmic rays (LECRs). It indicates that an LECR component would also
exist in the GCXE. The high-resolution spectra of the GCXE might be able to resolve the unknown
LECR components from the X-ray echo components and measure the amount in the GC region.
3.5 Charge Exchange in the Solar System and Beyond
With the first observations of comet Hyakutake with ROSAT in March 1996, astronomers were
surprised to discover that the comet was 100 times brighter in X-rays than predicted110. It is now
known111 that the X-rays were produced primarily by charge exchange (CX) collisions between
hot plasma ions from the solar wind and cold neutral atoms in the cometary atmosphere. This
process is also observed when the solar wind interacts with neutral gas in the heliosphere112 and
planetary atmospheres113;114. CX can occur in any region in which a hot plasma interacts with a
cold neutral gas, making it a useful diagnostic tool for studying astrophysical plasmas and the ISM.
Heliospheric and exospheric foreground CX emission also poses an ?astrophysical nuisance?, as it
contaminates all X-ray observations115. Foreground CX emission particularly affects diagnostics
of the X-ray emission from the local bubble116. CX is also expected to contribute to the X-
12
Science with XRISM
ray spectra from astrophysical sources outside of our solar system, such as in galaxy clusters117,
supernova remnants118, and star forming galaxies119;120. CX emission will be discussed further in
Section 6.
XRISM will readily discriminate CX emission mechanisms from other processes, and provide
better constraints for CX within our own solar system. Observations of cometary spectra will
help constrain the neutral density in a cometary coma and the solar wind ion abundance, and
observations of the Mars and Jovian atmospheres will place constraints on the importance of CX
in these atmospheres, helping us understand the relative significance of other processes producing
X-rays.
4 PHYSICS AND DYNAMICS OF COSMIC PLASMAS
(Primary editors: Maxim Markevitch, Irina Zhuravleva)
The ability to measure the widths and positions of emission lines of multiple elements at high
precisionwillallowXRISMtoperformuniquediagnosticsoftheoptically-thinplasmainamultitude
ofastrophysicalsystems. Belowwediscussseveralavenuesforsuchstudies,whichfallintotwobroad
classes — the dynamics based on line Doppler shifts and broadening, and the relative line fluxes.
While Resolve is spending long exposures performing spectroscopic studies of the cluster bright
central regions, Xtend, with its wide field of view and low instrument background, will obtain
high-statistics maps of the plasma density, temperature, and abundances of main elements at much
greater off-center distances, providing information on large-scale cluster dynamics that drive many
of those spectroscopic phenomena.
4.1 Velocity Field of Intracluster Plasma
The hot gas in galaxy clusters is continuously stirred by mergers, feedback from AGN, motions
of galaxies, magneto-thermal and plasma instabilities, etc. All these processes generate bulk and
turbulent motions of the gas in the ICM. Turbulent motions cascade down towards dissipation
scales, amplifyingandtanglingtheICMmagneticfield121;122 andacceleratingcosmicrays123;124;125
through the second-order Fermi process. Using high-resolution XRISM spectra, we will map the
gas velocity field in galaxies, clusters, and other extended X-ray sources with the accuracy of < 100
km s−1, bringing a new dimension in the study of astrophysical plasmas.
Resonance Scattering in Strong Emission Lines The same data used for the Doppler
broadening measurements will provide complementary velocity constraints through the resonant
scattering effect126. Resonant scattering reduces fluxes in some strong resonant lines in the cores
of galaxies and clusters with respect to the fluxes in an optically-thin plasma. The degree of the
suppression depends mainly on the amplitude of turbulent motions of the gas — the stronger the
motion, the smaller the effect. Therefore, the suppression of lines can be used as a powerful inde-
pendent probe of small-scale motions127;128. Such measurements have been successfully done in the
innermost regions of galaxies and groups using high-resolution XMM-Newton RGS data129;45;130 as
well as Hitomi data131 on Perseus (Figure 11). Furthermore, by measuring the Doppler broadening
and resonant scattering as a function of projected distance from the center, as well as the shapes
of strong emission lines, one can place constraints on the anisotropy of gas motions132 in bright
cluster cores.
The strength of the resonant scattering depends on the line optical depth. For hot systems such
as Perseus (T ∼ 5 keV), the effect is strongest for the resonant He-like Fe line at 6.7 keV (τ ∼ 3
if v = 0). For cooler systems such as Virgo (T ∼ 2-3 keV), the thickest lines, τ ∼ 1 − 1.5, are
13
Science with XRISM 4.1 Velocity Field of Intracluster Plasma
NGC 4636 (XRISM predictions,100 ks)
Perseus clusters (Hitomi observations)
Best-fitting bapec model without W line
(model without RS) / (model with RS)
Figure 11: Left: HitomiobservationsofresonantscatteringinthecoreofthePerseuscluster. Thestrongestlineof
FeXXV(w)issuppressedby∼20%inthecenterrelativetothepredictionsfortheoptically-thinplasma131. Right:
100 ks XRISM simulated spectrum around the Fe XVII (0.826 keV) line from the center of NGC 4636, assuming no
motionsofthegas(top)andisotropicturbulencewithV=150km/s(bottom). Redandblacklines: modelswithand
without resonant scattering130.
Fe XXIII (E = 1.129 keV), Fe XXIV (1.168 keV) and Fe XXV (6.7 keV). In cool systems such
as giant elliptical galaxies and groups (T ∼ 1 keV), the resonant scattering effect could be even
stronger since the optical depth of the strongest Fe XVII line (0.87 keV) could be up to ∼ 8−10
(Figure 11).
Power spectrum of turbulence For many astrophysical applications, it is important to un-
derstand spatial scales associated with the measured velocities of gas motions as well as statistical
properties of turbulence (e.g., power spectrum or structure function). For instance, the turbu-
lent heating rate, which is important for understanding energy transport in the ICM, is ∝ v3/l,
where v is velocity associated with turbulent motions on a scale l. The slope of the power spec-
trum within inertial range tells us about the intrinsic properties of turbulence (e.g., hydrodynamic
vs. magnetohydrodynamic, isotropic vs. anisotropic) and transport processes in the intracluster
plasma133.
Measuring the power spectrum of turbulence from the observed characteristics (line widths and
shifts)isnotatrivialmatter. Someideastailoredforgalaxyclustershavebeenproposed134;23. One
of them utilizes a steep decline of the X-ray surface brightness with radius observed in cool-core
clusters. In such clusters, the measured line broadening as a function of projected distance from
the center would effectively probe velocities on different spatial scales (Figure 12, left panel). For
clusters with flat surface brightness profiles, such as Coma, mapping of the projected velocity field
provides the most direct way of obtaining the velocity power spectrum134.23 showed that even with
a sparse coverage of the Coma cluster, XRISM will be able to determine the injection scale of the
turbulence(Figure12). Althoughitislikelythatthesemeasurementswillbedoneinasmallsample
of clusters, they will significantly advance the field and calibrate the density fluctuations - velocity
relation that is currently used as an indirect probe for the turbulence power spectrum135;136.
14
Science with XRISM 4.2 Shocks in Clusters and Elsewhere
Figure 12: Left: In a cluster with a centrally peaked surface brightness, the projected radius r determines the size
oftheregionalongthelineofsight,fromwhichthelargestfractionofphotonscontributestothelineflux. Thissize
corresponds to the dominant scale of motions we will probe at each r134. Right: structure function of turbulence in
theComaclusterasXRISMwouldmeasureifspectraaremeasuredinfivepointingregionsshowninthebottomleft
corner. The assumed Mach number of turbulence is 0.2. Different colors correspond to different assumptions about
the injection scale of turbulence23.
4.2 Shocks in Clusters and Elsewhere
Shock fronts are ubiquitous on all scales across the Universe, from the solar wind to supernova
remnants (SNRs) to the intergalactic plasma. They convert kinetic energy into thermal energy of
the medium in which they propagate and accelerate cosmic ray particles via the Fermi mechanism.
The physics of shocks in magnetized astrophysical plasmas is uncertain and complex. XRISM
will uncover interesting aspects of the shock physics in clusters and SNR. For clusters with large
shock fronts, such as A754 and Coma, XRISM’s angular resolution is sufficient to isolate the
post-shock region and derive its spectrum. XRISM will characterize the small-scale turbulence
that could be driven by the shock and look for transient deviations from thermal and ionization
equilibriumcausedbytheshockpassage,probingtheenergyconversionmechanismsandthevarious
equilibration timescales in the plasma.
4.3 Plasma Diagnostics
While our usual approach of analyzing an X-ray spectrum is brute-force fitting of the whole energy
intervalwithaphysicalmodelthatpredictsallthelinesandcontinuum,inmanycasesthequantities
of interest can be separated and determined independently using certain emission lines sensitive
to those quantities. This can be particularly helpful when deviations from thermal and ionization
equilibrium are possible or when the model includes nonthermal emission. XRISM will provide us
with these new plasma diagnostics.
When a plasma is in thermal equilibrium, all particle species (electrons, protons, and heavier
ions) must have the same temperature, which means that ions of different atomic mass should have
different thermal velocities. On the other hand, if the plasma has any bulk streams or turbulence,
allionsparticipateinthosemotionsatthesamevelocity. Bymeasuringthelinewidthsfordifferent
elements, we can disentangle the two broadening mechanisms and thus determine the ion temper-
15
Science with XRISM 4.3 Plasma Diagnostics
ature (Kitayama et al. 2014). Various interesting processes can result in temporary electron-ion
nonequilibrium, such as a shock passage and waves in the plasma. An attempt has been made to
determine T in Perseus137, which showed T = T but with a large uncertainty. XRISM will make
i i e
such measurements possible in many clusters and other astrophysical systems.
αyL/βyLiS αyL/γyLS αyL/βyLrA w/βeHaC z/βeHeF z/γeHeF z/δeHeF z/ǫeHeF
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
)Vek(
Tk
Excitation Temperatures
w/αyLiS w/αyLS w/αyLrA w/αyLaC z/αyLeF βeH/αyLeF γeH/αyLeF δeH/αyLeF ǫeH/αyLeF
In a plasma that has been rapidly
heated (e.g., by a shock), different ions
Ionization Temperatures
take different amounts of time to arrive
at the ionization state determined by the
electron temperature, and for a short pe-
riod, the plasma can be out of ionization
equilibrium139. This effect, common in
SNRs, manifests itself as an anomalous
ratio of the abundances of different ions
of the same element with respect to that
expected for the measured T under the
e
equilibrium assumption — it would cor-
respondtoadifferent“ionizationtemper-
ature.”Inclusters,theionizationequilib-
rium timescales are generally very short,
sothedetectionofanysuchdeviationcan
indicate a very recent heating event. For
a system that is a mixture of plasmas
Figure13: LineratiosfromtheHitomispectrumofPerseus138;
at different temperatures (in 3D or in
labels w and z refer to resonant and forbidden transitions of
projection), lines from different elements the Heα complex. Left: T derived from pairs of lines for the
e
“highlight”differenttemperaturephases. sameion. Right: the“ionizationtemperature”foreachelement,
derivedfromthelinesfordifferentionsofthesameelement;their
The relative population of different
significant differences may indicate a deviation from ionization
excitation states for the same ion reflects
equilibriumoramixtureoftemperatures. Solidanddashedlines
the temperature of free electrons in the are for different atomic codes.
plasma. Thus, the ratio of lines emitted
by the same ion can give an independent measure of T , complementary to that determined from
e
the shape of the X-ray continuum. This is especially useful when there is a mixture of plasmas
at different temperatures along the line of sight — as is often the case for extended sources. The
Hitomi Perseus observation has been used to determine the ionization temperature and T from the
e
line ratios (the “excitation temperature”) using several line pairs (Figure 13,138). The excitation
and ionization temperatures are consistent with a mixture of temperatures in a relatively narrow
range. XRISM will make these temperature diagnostics available for many clusters.
The thermal plasma in galaxy clusters is permeated with magnetic fields and ultrarelativistic
(γ ∼ 104) electrons, which reveal themselves via radio synchrotron radiation140. While these
components contribute little to the ICM pressure, they can alter its microscopic properties quite
significantly. The radio synchrotron measurements cannot disentangle the magnetic pressure from
the density of the relativistic electrons, but Inverse Compton (IC) emission from the same electrons
— upscattering of the Cosmic Microwave Background photons into the X-ray band — can141.
The X-ray IC spectrum should be a power law that can be deduced from the radio synchrotron
emission. Searches of such power-law emission from clusters have been numerous but unsuccessful,
because its surface brightness is far lower than the thermal emission and because the ICM is multi-
temperature, so any “hard tail” in the residuals of a fit of the continuum by a thermal model can
be interpreted as another thermal component142. The latter complication can be alleviated by
deriving the temperature structure of the plasma from the spectral lines (see above) rather than
16
Science with XRISM
the continuum fits, because a hot thermal component that is needed to explain a hard continuum
excess must also produce emission lines characteristic of that temperature.
5 FORMATION AND EVOLUTION OF COMPACT OBJECTS
(Primary editors: Jon Miller, Chris Done, Mar´ıa D´ıaz-Trigo)
5.1 Winds from Compact Galactic Sources
Winds are ubiquitous from accretion disks, and are detected in black hole and accreting neutron
star binaries with low magnetic fields143;144;145;146;147;148;149;150;151;152, and some pulsars153;154;155.
They are also detected in accreting white dwarf systems, predominantly in UV and EUV spec-
tra156;157;158;159;160. Disk winds and outflows are more widely studied in AGN, where such flows
canpotentiallycontrolthestarformation-poweredgrowthofthehostgalaxy. However,understand-
ing winds and jets from accretion onto stellar-mass compact objects can provide an independent
angle on the nature of winds and jets from massive black holes161.
Indeed,stellar-masscompactobjectsoffersomeuniqueopportunities. WhereasanAGNlifetime
may typically be ∼ 107 years162, mass accretion rates can change by orders of magnitude over
just weeks and months in stellar-mass compact objects163;164. Moreover, although the kinetic
power of winds from stellar-mass compact objects can be modest, their role and impact may be
anythingbut. Theymaybeamanifestationoftheprocessesthatdrivemassandangularmomentum
transferwithintheaccretiondisk,enablingobservationaltestsofanalyticalandnumericalaccretion
disk theory165;166. In some cases, winds (and nova episodes in white dwarf binaries) may expel
more gas than the system is able to accrete, altering the evolution of the binary system and
compact object148;149. High-resolution X-ray spectroscopy is the key to learning how these winds
are launched (which also determines how much energy, momentum and mass they carry), and how
they connect to the accretion flow and its relativistic radio jet167;168;169;170.
Disk-dominated states Winds are seen when the accretion flow is dominated by an accretion
disk: the high/soft state in black hole X-ray binaries, the “banana branch” in typical neutron star
X-ray binaries, and outbursting or dwarf nova white dwarf systems144;147;148;150. Winds largely
disappear when the source makes a transition to spectrally harder states and/or lower Eddington
fractions. Typically, a radio jet appears as the source makes this transition171. This general anti-
correlation of the jet and the wind has led to some speculation that these flows are fundamentally
part of the same processes, with the state change leading to a re-organization of the magnetic field
from powering the jet to powering the wind172;173. Alternatively, the response of the wind could
instead be linked to the change in the illuminating spectrum at the state transition, with over-
ionization leading to a lack of atomic transitions. Indeed, these factors are not mutually exclusive
and may act concurrently.
Non-magnetic wind models are either radiation-driven (for L ≥ L ), thermally driven, or UV
Edd
line driven. The disks around white dwarfs are bright in UV, and the corresponding winds have a
modest ionization; UV line driving is likely the dominant process by which winds are expelled from
these disks. In contrast, black hole X-ray binary and neutron star X-ray binary disks are too hot
forUVlinedrivingtobeimportant, andtherelativeimportanceofthermalandmagneticprocesses
in driving winds in these systems remains unclear. The ability of high-resolution spectroscopy to
accurately measure velocities, to separate distinct wind zones, and to measure launching radii will
be crucial to resolving their nature.
The excellent spectral resolution of Resolve will make it possible to separate complexes of lines,
andtoexaminethevelocityprofileofspecificstronglines. Density-sensitivelinesfromintermediate
17
Science with XRISM 5.1 Winds from Compact Galactic Sources
6.4 6.6 6.8 7 7.2 7.4
2−mc
1−Vek
1−s
stnuoc
dezilamron
2.0
1.0
50.0
20.0
10.0
6.4 6.6 6.8 7 7.2 7.4
Energy (keV)
2−mc
1−Vek
1−s
stnuoc
dezilamron
2.0
1.0
50.0
20.0
10.0
Energy (keV)
Figure 14: Left: The Chandra/HETG third-order spectrum of GRS 1915+105166. The Fe XXVI line is revealed
as a spin-orbit doublet splity by 22 eV, and four separate absorption zones are required. The fastest zones have
blueshifts of 0.01 and 0.03c, and are evident just above 7.0 and 7.2 keV. Right: A simulated 50 ks Resolve spectrum
of GRS 1915+105 in the same state, using the best-fit model of the HETG. In the simulated data, re-emission that
can be used to measure launching radii is easily detected just to the red of the absorption lines, as are the fastest,
most powerful wind components.
charge states157;145;174;175 will be accessible to Resolve, by virtue of its broad pass band. When
the density of a wind component is measured directly, the absorption radius can be derived via
the photoionization parameter. Independently, velocity broadening of the emission component in
accretion disk P Cygni profiles can be used to measure wind production radii165;166 (see Figure 14).
Therelativeimportanceofemissionandabsorptionfeaturescandeterminethegeometryofdisk
winds, and trace the scale height of winds as a function of Eddington fraction. Narrow emission
lines can potentially reveal the scale height of the outer disk, the extent to which it is flared, and
how such structure and ionization may relate to sharp flux dips176. Line broadening can reveal the
characteristic radius, while line flux is related to the fraction of the sky that is subtended by the
outer disk relative to the source.
Non-thermal X-ray states There is a major spectral transition seen in all types of disk
accreting systems, where the disk emission drops dramatically and the non-thermal X-ray emission
increases. In black hole X-ray binaries this is called the “low/hard” state; in neutron stars, it is
the “island” or “extreme island” state; in dwarf novae, an equivalent state is called quiescence
(note, however, in this case the X-rays are optically-thin thermal emission, not non-thermal). In
all systems, this transition correlates with stronger radio emission from the jet171;163. There is still
considerable debate concerning the origin and nature of this transition, but one model is that the
inner, geometrically-thin, optically-thick accretion disk transitions into a hot, geometrically-thick,
optically-thin flow177;178. Some theoretical treatments suggest that an optically-thin accretion flow
with a large scale height is more efficient at producing a jet because poloidal fields are easier to
maintain in such a flow179;180.
Exactly why winds appear to be quenched or diminished in non-thermal states is a complex
problem. Clearly, changes in the accretion disk magnetic field topology, the geometry of the inner
accretion flow, and the spectrum emitted by the inner accretion flow may be closely linked. The
exact sequence of such changes is not clear; it may depend on, e.g., whether the mass accretion
rate is increasing or decreasing, or a number of other factors. Disk reflection and wind studies with
Resolve will allow substantial progress. Winds might persist, but at lower column densities and
18
Science with XRISM 5.2 Surface Redshifts from Massive White Dwarfs
much higher ionizations; the unprecedented sensitivity and resolution of Resolve can detect such
winds. Resolve will also make it possible to separately trace the evolution of outflows, the inner
disk, and the outer disk, potentially revealing the importance of geometric changes in diminishing
outflows.
5.2 Surface Redshifts from Massive White Dwarfs
AsnotedintheAstro-Hwhitepaperonwhitedwarfs181,amicrocalorimetermaybeabletodirectly
measure the redshift from the surface of a white dwarf. The anticipated shift is small (a few parts
in ten thousand); however, the centroid of a strong line can be measured to an accuracy that is
much sharper than a single spectral bin, particularly with the inclusion of the calibration pixel.
The motivations for this measurement are simple, but profound. It is not clear how effectively
white dwarfs can gain mass through accretion; it may be that nova episodes – with temporary
nuclear burning on the white dwarf surface – serve to expel more gas than they accrete between
such episodes. Finding a massive white dwarf in a binary would clearly signal that accretion does
add mass and can thereby lead to SNe Ia, with consequences for elemental seeding within galaxies
and the use of SNe Ia as standard candles for cosmology.
In principle, the measurement is simple: the redshift of an Fe Kα line excited on the surface of
the white dwarf determines M/R; since the equation of state is known, this can be translated to
M. In practice, there are several difficulties. The Fe Kα line is actually a doublet, separated by
13 eV, and it may be the case that a range of charge states are observed; Fe I-XVII lines all lie
within a range of just 30 eV. The motions of the bodies within the binary system and the rotation
of the white dwarf may add complications. Finally, lines may not be excited only on the surface of
the white dwarf, though lines from the surface should be stronger than lines from elsewhere in the
system.
5.3 High-mass X-ray Binaries
The compact objects in most high-mass X-ray binaries likely accrete by gravitationally focusing
the wind driven by their massive companion star. Close to the compact object, the wind may be
corralled into a small accretion disk. The exact geometry of the flow within the system is complex;
the accreting gas may be shocked, photoionized, and collisionally ionized at different points. The
flow is not axisymmetric, and may change considerably with source state. In pulsars such as Vela
X-1, the pulse can act as a lighthouse that sweeps across the accretion flow, helping to reveal its
nature. This effect, combined with the orbit of the binary, especially in eclipsing sources182, can
potentially be utilized to study the wind geometry in detail.
These systems also afford the opportunity to study the winds of massive stars183. In particular,
sharp flux dips in the light curves of high-mass X-ray binaries likely signal obscuration by dense
clumpsthatarecharacteristicofUVline-drivenwindsfrommassivestars,givingusauniquechance
to directly probe these clumps. Most current data only suggest that the obscuration events are the
result of ”grey” absorption, without a specific energy dependence. Indeed, it is not clear if the dips
are due to a single cloud with a fairly uniform density, or a collection of very dense clumps with a
low volume filling factor.
The exquisite velocity resolution enabled by XRISM will separate lines produced close to the
compact object from those excited in the larger stellar wind, and will detect velocity shifts as a
functionofphase. Resolvewillalsomeasuretheionization,densityandtemperatureoftheaccreting
material, enabling detailed comparisons to hydrodynamic simulations. It may be possible to detect
lines and variability within the strongest flux dips, and to thereby determine the nature of the
19
Science with XRISM 5.4 Ultra-luminous X-ray Sources
2 4 6
2−mc
1−Vek
1−s
stnuoc
dezilamron
3−01×4
3−01×2
0
6 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7 7.2
Energy (keV)
2−mc
1−Vek
1−s
stnuoc
dezilamron
3−01×8
3−01×6
3−01×4
3−01×2
0
Energy (keV)
Figure15: Left: A150ksChandra/HETGfirst-orderspectrumoftheHMXBpulsarLMCX-4. Afterstrongbinning,
thereisevidenceofaneutralFeKemissionlineat6.4keV,anHe-likelineat6.7keV,andpotentialforanH-likeline
at 6.97 keV. When fit with an “apec” model (shown in red), a modest red-shift of 900 km s−1 is observed, perhaps
indicatingaspecificandphase-dependentflowpatternwithinthebinary. Right: Asimulated50ksResolvespectrum
of LMC X-4. The He-like line complex is easily resolved into the four expected constituent lines, and the H-like line
is revealed as a doublet. The redshift of the ionized lines is readily apparent, and the width of the neutral Fe K line
may trace the radial extent of the inner disk.
absorbers that cause the dips, improving our view of UV line-driven winds from massive stars.
5.4 Ultra-luminous X-ray Sources
Ultra-luminous X-ray sources (or, ULXs) can be defined as off-nuclear point sources in nearby
galaxieswithimpliedluminositiesabovetheEddingtonlimitfora10solarmassblackhole. Inrecent
years, a growing number of ULXs appear to be strong pulsars, likely accreting from massive stellar
companions184;185;186;187. It is likely that the strong magnetic fields play a role, and therefore it is
notclearwhethersuchsourcesaretrulyhighlysuper-Eddington, orlessextremelysuper-Eddington
(or Eddington-limited) but subject to geometric and relativistic beaming. Careful observations of
mildly super-Eddington pulsars such as LMC X-4 may enable a better understanding of accretion
in ULXs (see Figure 15).
In any super-Eddington source, radiation is coupled to gas and is – by definition – defeating
gravity, so very strong outflows are expected. This is likely the case in the famous Galactic X-ray
binary SS 433188;189. In two ULXs, there is now tentative evidence of fast, variable outflows in
very deep observations with XMM-Newton190. Resolve observations that are triggered on specific
flux states or behaviors in a subset of ULXs may be able to make wind detections and to advance
studies of the accretion flow in these enigmatic sources.
With Resolve, we will begin to study whether outflows have a single velocity, or a range of
velocities, as well as how and where they are launched. In a subset of the deepest ULX spectra
obtained with XMM-Newton, there is also tentative evidence of emission lines. It may be possible
with XRISM to examine whether these lines are excited in the wind of a massive companion star, if
they are tied to a young supernova remnant, or if they are better attributed to local star formation.
20
Science with XRISM 5.5 Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables
5.5 Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables
When a neutron star or white dwarf has a magnetic field strong enough to channel the accretion
flow, it is directed towards the magnetic poles. Even with the power of present-day computers,
simplifying assumptions are necessarily involved in MHD simulations of accretion flows in the
presence of strong magnetic fields. Details of a wide range of phenomena – from spin up/down
of the compact object to ejection of a wind (including in the propeller regime) – depend on this
interaction. Magnetic cataclysmic variables (CVs) of the intermediate polar (IP) type usually have
a partial accretion disk, and a well-developed theory of X-ray emission191 that can be used to
measure a key parameter: the range of radii (∆r) over which disk matter connects to the field
lines. Since accretion follows field lines that are close to dipolar, ∆r determines the area on the
white dwarf surface over which accretion occurs.
We anticipate that we can use the triplet ratio of the He-like Fe lines to measure the density,
expected to be in the 1016−18 cm−3 range181. Combined with existing multiwavelength data, which
allow us to infer other parameters such as the inner disk radius and the total accretion rate, the
density measurement will allow us to infer ∆r.
The He-like Fe lines of some magnetic CVs are extraordinary strong, and may indicate that
resonant scattering plays a role192. Since resonant scattering is dependent upon geometry, we can
expect to see the resonant component and other components of the line change as a function of the
white dwarf spin phase.
6 THE LIVES AND DEATHS OF STARS
(Primary editors: Paul Plucinsky, L´ıa Corrales)
6.1 Star Formation and the Cold/Hot ISM
How molecular cloud materials accrete onto pre-stellar cores is a fundamental question in star
formation. Optical, infrared, and radio observations now image accretion disks around young
stellar objects193, but they have not resolved the innermost regions where matter finally accretes
onto the cores. Mass accretion at the innermost region is probably induced by interaction of large
scale magnetic fields of the core and the innermost disk. Collimated jets seen in their outskirts are
suspected to be byproducts of this innermost accretion process.
X-ray emission from protostars is heavily obscured by thick (N ≥ 1022 cm−2) circumstellar
H
medium (CSM) below 2 keV where various emission lines are. However, their X-ray spectra often
show strong Fe K emission lines at ∼6.7 keV as well as Fe fluorescence at 6.4 keV, which provide
powerful tools to diagnose plasma conditions and dynamics of the innermost region. Freefall and
Keplerian velocities near the core are a few hundred km s−1, and hot plasmas are also expected
to flow around these velocities. Unfortunately, existing high-resolution grating spectrometers are
insufficient to resolve such velocity shifts. XRISM will resolve plasma motions near the core for the
first time.
XRISM observations of protostars will reveal: i) geometry of X-ray plasmas around the core
from Doppler shift or broadening measurements of highly ionized Fe emission lines, ii) plasma
condition (e.g., equilibrium state) from multiple Fe emission lines, iii) dynamics of the innermost
accretion disk from Doppler shifts or broadening of the fluorescent Fe K line, iv) jet formation
mechanism from Doppler shifts of emission lines during X-ray flares.
Two nearby molecular clouds, ρ Oph (d ∼ 165 pc) and R CrA (d ∼ 130pc), hold protostars
that are bright enough in X-rays for detailed spectroscopy with XRISM. The other stellar classes
21
Science with XRISM 6.1 Star Formation and the Cold/Hot ISM
important for mass accretion study are FU Ori/EX Lup type stars194, which are young stars
experiencing episodic mass accretion outbursts. The events occur rarely, but if such an outburst
occurs in a nearby young star, Resolve should be able to collect valuable information on mass
accretion activity.
50:00.0 48:00.0 46:00.0 44:00.0 42:00.0 10:40:00.0
00:00:95-00:01
00:02
00:03
00:04
00:0500:00:06-00:01
00:02
00:03
0.50 - 0.70 keV
0.70 - 0.86 keV
0.86 - 0.96 keV
Figure 16: Simulated 30 ks Resolve spectra of two regions in the Carina nebula. The model assumes that half of
theemissionoriginatesfromhot,ionizedplasma,andtheotherhalffromchargeexchangeofthesamepopulationof
ions with cold gas. The green and yellow dotted lines indicate the positions of emission lines which are expected to
originateprimarilyfromchargeexchangeandthermalplasma,respectively;blackdottedlinesindicateemissionlines
expected to be have strong emission from both mechanisms. Inset: Chandra true color X-ray image of the region
(Townsley et al., 2011), showing diffuse plasma extending over the Carina nebula as well as multiple X-ray bright
young stars. Red: 0.50-0.70 keV, Green: 0.70-0.86 keV, Blue: 0.86-0.96 keV.
Some massive star forming regions are accompanied by diffuse hot X-ray plasma with kT ∼0.1–
0.8 keV (RCW38:195, M17:196;197, Carinae nebula:198;199;200, Orion nebula:201, see Figure 16).
The plasma apparently fills cavities of the parent molecular cloud and interacts with cold, thick
molecular clouds at the contact surface. The origin of the diffuse plasma is not understood. One
hypothesis is that the plasma consists of multiple SNRs; however, none of them have a spherical
shape like conventional SNRs or are accompanied by compact objects except for a few cases202;203.
The other hypothesis is that the diffuse plasma is thermalized by collision of winds from massive
stars in the field. However, it is controversial if massive stars in the field can supply enough energy
to thermalize the observed X-ray plasmas.
22
Science with XRISM 6.2 Supernovae and their Remnants
The keys to solving this problem should be in the elemental abundance distribution and the
dynamics of the plasmas. X-ray CCD spectra of the Carina nebula demonstrated strong spatial
variation of the Fe L emission lines198;199;200. If this is caused by Fe abundance variation, the X-ray
plasmas are likely produced by supernova explosions. Meanwhile, supernova ejecta fly much faster
than massive stellar winds. This difference may be seen in broadenings of emission line unless the
plasmas are fully relaxed.
XRISM observations of the diffuse X-ray plasmas in massive star forming regions will reveal:
i) plasma elemental abundances and their spatial variation by resolving individual emission lines,
ii) plasma dynamics from Doppler shifts or broadening of these emission lines, iii) the presence of
charge exchange lines200, which traces interaction between hot plasma and cold molecular gases.
A discovery of turbulence in the X-ray plasma may also yield greater insight into the physics of
particle acceleration in the star forming region.
6.2 Supernovae and their Remnants
The high-resolution spectra that will be acquired by XRISM promise to revolutionize the spectral
analysis of extended objects like SNRs, much as the spectra from the gratings instruments on
Chandra and XMM-Newton have done for point-like sources. An example of the type of spectrum
that XRISM can obtain from an SNR is shown in Figure 17, showing a simulated spectrum of
a Type Ia remnant. The various line complexes are highlighted, and broadening of the lines by
several thousand km s−1 is included. We briefly describe here some of the science that will be
enabled by this new capability. The reader is referred to the more comprehensive reviews written
for Astro-H204;205;206 for a more complete list.
Figure 17: AsamplespectrumthatonemightexpectfromayoungTypeIaSNR,suchasTychoorKepler’sSNR.
Lines from various elements or groups are highlighted. Lines are broadened due to the extremely high temperatures
that result from gas being shocked by a 5,000 km s−1 shock wave. XRISM will resolve the widths of these lines in
SNRs, leading to a direct measurement of the plasma temperature.
23
Science with XRISM 6.2 Supernovae and their Remnants
Type Ia SNRs Type Ia SNe are generally believed to form through two scenarios: the single-
degenerate (SD) channel composed of a white dwarf (WD) and a stellar companion and the double-
degenerate(DD)channelcomposedoftwoWDs207. Evidencehasgrownthatbothscenariosoperate
innaturebutitisnotclearifonechannelisthedominantmechanismnorisitclearwhattheprecise
explosion mechanisms are for these systems.
Theoretical work on the explosion mechanisms and the nucleosynthetic yields208;209 indicate
that the amount of neutron-rich species (58Ni, 56Fe, 54Fe, and 55Mn) produced is sensitive to the
central density of the WD, the process referred to as neutron-rich nuclear statistical equilibrium
(n-NSE). The precise amount of these neutron-rich species and the intermediate mass elements
(IME) also depends on the details of the explosion. These different nucleosynthetic yields offer the
possibility that X-ray spectroscopy of the remnant of a Type Ia SNe can distinguish a progenitor
of a WD near the Chandrasekhar mass (SD scenario) from one with a lower central density (DD
scenario). The Ni/Fe and Mn/Fe ratios in the Suzaku spectra of 3C 397 imply a SD progenitor,
assuming that these ratios can only be achieved with high neutronization in the ejecta210. The
ratio of Ca to S was used as a diagnostic of high neutronization in the galactic remnants Tycho,
Kepler, 3C 397 and G337.2-0.7 and the Large Magellanic Cloud remnant N103B to argue that the
metallicity of the progenitor could not explain the high neutronization211.
The high-resolution spectra from Resolve of Type Ia SNRs will allow an accurate determination
of the fluxes of all the lines that contribute in the Cr Kα, Mn Kα, Fe Kα, and Ni Kα line complex
bandpasses,allowingtheratiosoftheseelementstobedeterminedwithunprecedentedprecision. In
addition, Resolve spectra will cover the entire energy range from the IMEs to the Fe peak elements
with the highest spectral resolution yet achieved. These observations promise to be the definitive
measurements of these abundances that will constrain the origin (SD vs. DD) and explosion
mechanism for these objects.
Core-Collapse SNRs The explosion mechanism for CCSNe is still debated, with one common
themethatsphericalsymmetrymustbebrokenatsomepointtorevivetheshockwhichconsistently
stalls in simulations. But where and how this asymmetry is produced is still unknown. A key
observational constraint needed is the 3D structure in space and velocity of the ejecta from the
innermost layers of the star. Pioneering work on the ejecta distribution of the brightest Galactic
SNR Cas A has been done using Chandra data212;213. Both these studies show a highly asymmetric
ejectadistributionandsignificantoverturningoftheejectawithhigh-Zmaterialatlargerradiithan
low-Z material. This distribution can be contrasted with that of Tycho, a Type Ia SNR, which
shows a more symmetric distribution214;215.
The results to date have large uncertainties given the spectral resolution of the current gener-
ation of detectors. For example, the studies with Chandra rely on the unresolved Si XII He-like
triplet. Assumptions must be made about the temperature and ionization state to derive the cen-
troid of the line complex. With the resolution of XRISM, these assumptions will no longer be
necessary. In fact, the resolution of the calorimeter is so high that for many lines of sight through
the centers of remnants like Cas A and Tycho, it will be possible to separate redshifted material
on the far side of the shell from blueshifted material on the near side of the shell.
The Hitomi results from the LMC SNR N132D from just 3.7 ks of data offer a preview of what
will be possible with XRISM. In this short observation216, the Fe Kα complex was shown to be
consistent with red-shifted emission with a velocity of ∼ 800 km s−1, while the S emission is con-
sistent with the local ISM velocity in the LMC, indicating a highly asymmetric ejecta distribution.
However, this result is model-dependent and significant at only the 1.6σ level.
Plasma Physics in SNRs The processes which heat particles in shock waves is one of the
most active areas of research in shock physics. It is not clear if the particles behind the shock will
assume a temperature proportional to the mass of the particle, or if partial equilibration amongst
24
Science with XRISM 6.2 Supernovae and their Remnants
Figure 18: Fits to the Mg He-like triplet (LEFT) and Fe-L region (RIGHT) in the Chandra HETG data from
SN1987A yield the ion temperatures for these elements217.
the electrons, protons, and ions occurs (and if so, on what timescales). A recent result on SN
1987A217 argues that the X-ray spectra are consistent with mass-proportional heating behind the
shock front for the ions of Ne, Mg, Si, and Fe. This analysis compared the widths of the lines
as determined by the HETG on Chandra to the predictions from 3D hydrodynamical models (see
Figure 18). The ratio of the ion temperature to the proton temperature is shown as a function
of Z in Figure 19 (the analysis for Fe is based solely on the Fe L lines). XRISM will measure the
widths of these lines to higher precision and allow more elements, such as Fe Kα, to be measured.
The SN1987A analysis also assumes that the plasma conditions are similar for the entire remnant.
For nearby galactic remnants, Resolve will measure the line broadening of ions as a function of
position behind the shock, disentangling the effects of thermal broadening and bulk motions from
mass-proportional heating.
Just as the importance and preva-
lenceofradiativerecombinationemission
was not appreciated until Suzaku pro-
vided moderate-resolution spectra with
low background and large collecting
area218;219, spectroscopy of SNRs will
change dramatically as new and unex-
pected features are discovered in high-
resolution spectra. An example of this is
CXemissioninSNRs,expectedtobesig-
nificant when high-temperature ions in-
teract with neutral material. The best
example of CX emission in a SNR to
date comes from the XMM-Newton RGS
spectrum of a dense knot in the Cygnus
Loop220. Figure 20 shows the high-
Figure 19: Ion to proton temperature ratio as a function of resolution spectrum from the RGS and
atomic number in SN1987A (from Miceli et a. 2019).
the moderate-resolution spectrum from
the pn. This example demonstrates how an acceptable fit to the CCD spectra could be achieved
25
Science with XRISM 6.3 Exoplanets
while excluding the CX emission but such a model fails to fit the high-resolution data of the RGS.
Anotherimportant effectwhich hasbeenmostlyignoredin spectral fittingof SNRs isresonance
scattering, whichcanaltertheratiooftheforbiddenandresonancelines. Ifsuchaneffectisignored
in the spectral fitting, the fitted parameters of the model will be systematically biased. This is
one possible explanation for the so-called “low-abundance problem” in which the ISM abundances
determined from fitting the forward shock emission in a SNR are systematically lower than those
determined by other means. The key to investigating this apparent discrepancy is to resolve the
He-liketripletsanddevelopamodelwhichrepresentsthehigh-resolutiondata. TheResolvespectra
will transform the field by providing the data that demand that these processes are included in the
spectral models, significantly improving our understanding of SNRs.
Figure 20: TheXMM-NewtonRGSspectrumoftheSW-KknotintheCygnusLoop. Theblackpointsarethedata
and the purple line is the best-fitted model including a significant charge exchange (CX) component and absorption
from an ionized component. The individual NEI (red) and CX (blue) components are shown. The upper data show
theXMM-NewtonpnCCDspectrum. Theresidualslabelledas?b2? areforamodelinwhichtheionizedabsorberis
along the line of sight while the residuals labelled as ?b3? are for an ionized absorber local to the SW-K knot itself.
6.3 Exoplanets
It has become increasingly apparent − through studies of our own solar system and hot Jupiters
around other stars − that magnetic and high-energy activity from planet host stars have a marked
effect on planet atmospheres and habitability. X-ray observations of exoplanet host stars provide
a marker of magnetic activity along with X-ray and UV flux, which affect exoplanet atmospheres
through photoionization, photo-induced chemical reactions, and substantial mass loss221;222. With
the recent launch of TESS, we expect many Earth-sized planets to be discovered around sun-like
stars out to 100 pc, or M dwarf stars out to 10 pc. This proximity means that exoplanet host stars
are likely to be X-ray bright enough for high signal-to-noise observations with XRISM, opening the
26
Science with XRISM
door for contributions to exoplanet science.
XRISM could also provide a new avenue of research by observing planetary transits from X-ray
bright exoplanet host stars. X-ray transits reveal the full extent of an exoplanet atmosphere and
probeevaporation, becausetheX-rayabsorptioncross-sectionsofatmosphericgasesarelargerthan
the optical. Only one exoplanet transit has ever been observed in the X-ray band − that of the
hot Jupiter HD 189733b − which showed a 6% transit depth, a factor of three deeper than the
optical transit223. Xtend could also probe the atmospheres of hot Jupiter planets by measuring
the depths of the X-ray transits, while Resolve can be used to search for high-resolution X-ray
absorption features from volatile elements like C, N, and O224. Such measurements would be
valuable for understanding atmospheric evaporation and measuring the composition of hot Jupiter
atmospheres, which can then be extended to the effects of high energy irradiation and coronal mass
ejection on Earth-like planets.
7 XRISM IN THE LANDSCAPE OF 2020s ASTRONOMY
(Primary editors: Erin Kara, Mar´ıa D´ıaz Trigo)
With a suite of new observatories launching in the early 2020s, XRISM will benefit from a rich
landscape, and will add depth to many of the main science drivers of those future observatories
(see Figure 21). In this chapter, we briefly highlight some of the science topics where XRISM,
together with space- and ground-based observatories, will make important breakthroughs, starting
from the nano-parsec scales around black holes and zooming out to mega-parsec scales in clusters
of galaxies. We emphasize that the synergistic science outlined in the following sub-sections is by
no means exhaustive, and encourage further collaborative efforts.
7.1 Independent Measurements of Black Hole Spin
The strong gravitational field around a black hole can be completely parametrized by its mass
and spin, which imprint distinct signatures on the inner accretion flow that emits in the X-ray
band. The spin tells how black holes form, as a slowly rotating black hole can only reach the
maximum spin allowed by general relativity by increasing its mass225. Therefore, measuring the
distribution of black hole spin in supermassive systems reveals the extent to which they are grown
throughaccretionormergers226. Ontheotherhand, stellarmassblackholesdonotaccreteenough
material to affect their spin, and therefore, measurements of black hole spin in these systems can
constrain supernova mechanisms and the evolution of massive stars.
Several techniques to measure black hole spin have been used. XRISM provides the best energy
resolution in the Fe Kα band, and thus will constrain the systematic uncertainties on the spin
through broad line spectroscopy. XRISM will determine if other components, e.g., ionized winds,
are imprinted on the broad Fe Kα emission line. IXPE will provide the first X-ray polarization
measurements of black hole spin. In black hole X-ray binaries in the thermal-dominated state, a
fraction of the thermal flux will be deflected by the strong-field gravity of the black hole and will
scatter off of the disk. In highly spinning black holes, the thermal emission will be highly polar-
ized227. Finally, observationswithNICERcanprovidespinconstraintsthroughtiminganalysis, by
measuring short timescale X-ray reverberation lags from reprocessed emission off the inner accre-
tion disk228 or through high-frequency quasi-periodic oscillations in black hole X-ray binaries that
may be associated with the orbital timescale at the innermost stable circular orbit229. Together,
XRISM, IXPE and NICER will use all of the information carried in photons (their energies, po-
27
Science with XRISM 7.2 The Disk-Wind-Jet Connection in Galactic Black Holes
Figure 21: A timeline of XRISM and current and future missions that are discussed in this chapter.
larizations and arrival times) to put the tightest constraints on strong gravity in accreting black
holes.
7.2 The Disk-Wind-Jet Connection in Galactic Black Holes
Accretion remains a central topic in modern astrophysics, and the variability timescales in X-ray
binaries (ms to days/months) are particularly suited for studying the complex coupling between
accretion and ejection. XRISM will measure the wind ionization, column density, and outflow ve-
locity to derive the mass outflow rate and the associated mechanical power. Radio and IR facilities,
such as the JVLA, ALMA and the VLT will measure the power output from jets. Comparing the
power output from winds vs. jets, and their evolution during an accretion outburst230 will deter-
mine the relation between these different ejection modes, and will establish if they are important
for triggering state transitions231.
ObservationsofaccretingblackholeswilltesttheoreticalmodelsthatassociatetheX-raycorona
with the base of a relativistic jet232 by making detailed measurements of the X-ray reflection
features. XRISM’sexquisitespectralresolutionwillbeinstrumentalindisentanglingthesereflection
featuresfromotherprocesses,suchasabsorptionthroughdiskwinds. HardX-rayobservationswith
NuSTAR will provide an important “lever-arm” for XRISM, by putting simultaneous constraints
on the X-ray continuum and reflection above 10 keV.
7.3 Dust Scattering Halos and Molecular Clouds
Studies of dust scattering halos around X-ray binaries constitute a useful tool to investigate the
distributionandpropertiesofdustgrainsalongthelineofsightortocalculatedistancesviachanges
in the halo profile233. XRISM will allow a two-tiered approach to dust studies by using Xtend and
Resolve to investigate dust scattering haloes and the X-ray absorption fine structure at 0.2−2 keV,
respectively. AddingobservationsofCOwithNOEMAorALMAwillhelptoconstraindustmodels
by providing an accurate map of the existent molecular clouds along the line of sight234;96;235.
7.4 Following Extreme Transients in Time Domain Surveys
X-ray observations have played a major role in time domain astronomy: from the discovery of new
galactic black holes, giant stellar flares, tidal disruption events (TDEs), and flares from Sgr A*,
to the existence of super-Eddington accretors, the discovery of magnetars, and millisecond X-ray
28
Science with XRISM 7.5 Galactic Outflows and the Startburst-AGN Connection
pulsars. Time domain astronomy is a quickly advancing field. Even in the next few years, we will
see major increases in the rate of transient discovery. In the optical, ZTF and LSST will discover
thousands of transients per night. In the radio, SKA will find tens of transients per night. In X-
rays,theeROSITAall-skysurveywillprovidea30-foldimprovementinsensitivity,discoveringfaint
transients, and producing a baseline against which we will compare future observations. Finally,
the Chinese Academy of Science’s Einstein Probe (to launch in late 2022) will use “lobster-eye”
optics to make a vast improvement in sensitivity for X-ray transient searches.
XRISM will follow-up on a wide variety of transients like TDEs, changing-look AGN, X-ray
bright SNe, Galactic black hole outbursts, GRB afterglows, and perhaps nearby kilonovae. XRISM
has a niche in time domain astronomy, and will be best suited for studying the detailed physics of
bright, isolated transients that evolve on timescales of days to weeks. High-resolution spectroscopy
hasalreadyprovedimportantfortransientscience, withthediscoveryofhighlyionizedwindsinthe
thermal state in black hole X-ray binaries150, along with the discovery of disk winds (even ultrafast
outflows) in TDEs236. XRISM will have a ToO response time similar to other large observatories
like XMM-Newton and Chandra.
7.5 Galactic Outflows and the Startburst-AGN Connection
The discovery of massive dusty and molecular components in multi-phase galactic outflows asso-
ciated with starbursts and AGN over the past decade confirmed that they have the potential to
regulate and perhaps halt star formation in their host galaxies, but we still do not know which
types of outflows most effectively disrupt and remove star-forming gas237. Moreover, outflows can
compress gas and trigger star formation, and it remains unclear whether starbursts trigger quasars
or vice versa. The source of outflows in systems with both a starburst and an AGN is also an open
question. Sensitive sub-mm facilities, such as ALMA and IRAM, as well as optical and near-IR
integral field spectrographs, have illustrated the diversity of outflows238. The largest missing piece
is measurements from hot and/or highly ionized gas, which contains most of the energy and much
of the mass and metals239.
X-ray observations of outflowing gas on both small (<1 pc) and large (>10 kpc) scales will
determine the genesis and ultimate impact of outflows. In particular, Fe XXV (6.7 keV) and Fe
XXVI (6.96 keV) trace both the very hot gas driving starburst winds240;241;242 and the relativistic
disk winds driven by the AGN243;244. XRISM will provide the first velocity, temperature, and mass
measurements in multiple hot starburst winds, and will be sensitive to weak and variable ultra-fast
outflows in many AGNs. On larger scales, soft X-ray lines trace the expanding winds and their
interaction with the ISM and CGM.
These measurements are important on their own, but must be understood in the context of
observations of cooler gas. The combination of XRISM, JWST, ALMA, and ground-based optical
and near-IR instruments (such as VLT/MUSE, Gemini/GMOS, TMT/IRIS, or ELT/HARMONI)
will provide a detailed accounting of the physical state, bulk velocity, and mass of the neutral and
ionized gas in nearby (d <200 Mpc) starburst and AGN outflows, enabling us to determine how
much gas can actually escape the galaxy’s gravity. In addition to the hottest gas, this will include
cool H detected in CO bands, warm H detected in the 2.124 µm line, dusty outflows detected
2 2
via PAH bands from 3−20 µm, warm ionized gas via Brγ, and hot, but cooling, gas from mid-IR
forbidden lines, such as [O IV], [Ne V], [Ne VI], and [S IV].
29
Science with XRISM 7.6 AGN Feedback in Clusters of Galaxies
7.6 AGN Feedback in Clusters of Galaxies
The hot atmospheres of many galaxy clusters are so luminous in X-ray emission that they should
radiate away their thermal energy in < 1 Gyr. Uninhibited cooling should then fuel molecular gas
and star formation at rates of hundreds to thousands of solar masses per year. However, observed
molecular gas reservoirs and star formation rates are ten times lower than predicted from pure
cooling. Instead, jets launched from the central SMBH are thought to regulate cooling245;246, but
the details of the AGN feedback process are not well understood. XRISM will allow us to probe
the physics of AGN feedback by measuring the velocity of bulk and turbulent motions of the hot
phase of the ICM.
Molecular gas is another key component in the AGN feedback cycle. This is the reservoir
for gas condensing out of the hot atmosphere, and the fuel source for accretion onto the central
supermassive black hole. Together XRISM and ALMA will probe the dynamics and energetics of
the hot phase and cold phases of the ICM, which is crucial for developing a complete model of
AGN feedback.
7.7 Particle Acceleration in Large-Scale Plasmas
XRISM will provide the first direct measurements of the turbulent line broadening in clusters that
host extended radio haloes. These will be crucial to verify existing, indirect hints that link the
non-thermal component and the kinetic energy in the ICM247;248, opening a new window into
quantitative studies of turbulent particle acceleration and magnetic field amplification on large
scales. Progress in this field is currently driven at a rapid pace by sensitive radio surveys using
LOFAR249 and GMRT250, and will continue in the future with the upgraded LOFAR 2.0 and
uGMRT, as well as MWA, MeerKAT, and the SKA. As these surveys reveal more and more of
the faint non-thermal plasma and map its radio spectral index, the Resolve instrument will deliver
the complementary imaging spectroscopy capabilities required to connect the properties of the
relativistic electrons seen in the low-frequency radio band with detailed dynamics of the thermal
gas permeating the cosmic web, thus revealing the intricate physics behind the Universe’s largest
particle accelerators.
7.8 Conclusion
The importance of high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy to the future of astronomy in general cannot
be overstated. Despite the fact that Hitomi only operated for a matter of weeks in 2016, the results
from that spacecraft are among the most highly-cited papers in the field of high-energy astronomy
in the past several years. By recovering the science lost by the untimely demise of Hitomi, XRISM
will continue its legacy into the next decade, paving the way for future X-ray missions, such as
Athena, which will be equipped with even greater capabilities.
The checkout, calibration, and performance verification phases will last approximately nine
months, after which XRISM will enter the general observer phase. Astronomers around the world
will be able to propose to an annual announcement of opportunity for competitively-awarded time
on the observatory. The science that is briefly outlined in this white paper is only the beginning of
what will be possible given the capabilities that this observatory will provide.
30
Science with XRISM
8 Acknowledgements
Additional inputs to this white paper were provided by Hideki Uchiyama, Masayoshi Nobukawa,
Kumiko K. Nobukawa, Shinya Nakashima, Shigeo Yamauchi, Takeshi G. Tsuru, Edmund Hodges-
Kluck,IuriiBabyk,KenjiHamaguchi,MauriceLeutenegger,RenataCumbee,andAuroraSimionescu.
The document was edited and compiled by Brian Williams.
The XRISM Science Team consists of the following members:
Lorella Angelini (NASA/GSFC), Marc Audard (University of Geneva), Hisamitsu Awaki (Ehime
University), Aya Bamba (University of Tokyo), Ehud Behar (Technion & ISAS/JAXA), Laura
Brenneman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics), Greg Brown (Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory), L´ıa Corrales (University of Michigan), Elisa Costantini (SRON), Renata
Cumbee (NASA/GSFC), Mar´ıa D´ıaz-Trigo (ESO), Chris Done (University of Durham), Tadayasu
Dotani (ISAS/JAXA), Ken Ebisawa (ISAS/JAXA), Megan Eckart (Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory), Dominique Eckert (University of Geneva), Satoshi Eguchi (Fukuoka University),
Teruaki Enoto (Kyoto University), Yuichiro Ezoe (Tokyo Metropolitan University), Ryuichi Fu-
jimoto (Kanazawa University), Yutaka Fujita (Osaka University), Yasushi Fukazawa (Hiroshima
University), Akihiro Furuzawa (Fujita Health University), Luigi Gallo (Saint Mary’s University),
Liyi Gu (RIKEN), Matteo Guainazzi (ESTEC), Kouichi Hagino (Tokyo University of Science),
Kenji Hamaguchi (NASA/GSFC), Isamu Hatsukade (University of Miyazaki), Takayuki Hayashi
(NASA/GSFC),KiyoshiHayashida(OsakaUniversity),NatalieHell(LawrenceLivermoreNational
Laboratory), Junko Hiraga (Kwansei Gakuin University), Edmund Hodges-Kluck (NASA/GSFC),
Ann Hornschemeier (NASA/GSFC), Akio Hoshino (NASA/GSFC), Yuto Ichinohe (Rikkyo Uni-
versity), Manabu Ishida (ISAS/JAXA), Kumi Ishikawa (ISAS/JAXA), Yoshitaka Ishisaki (Tokyo
Metropolitan University), Jelle Kaastra (SRON), Timothy Kallman (NASA/GSFC), Erin Kara
(MIT), Satoru Katsuda (Saitama University), Richard Kelley (NASA/GSFC), Caroline Kilbourne
(NASA/GSFC), Takao Kitaguti (RIKEN), Shunji Kitamoto (Rikkyo University), Shogo Kobayashi
(Tokyo University of Science), Takayoshi Kohmura (Tokyo University of Science), Aya Kubota
(Shibaura Institute), Maurice Leutenegger (NASA/GSFC), Mike Loewenstein (NASA/GSFC),
Yoshitomo Maeda (ISAS/JAXA), Maxim Markevitch (NASA/GSFC), Hironori Matsumoto (Os-
aka University), Kyoko Matsushita (Tokyo University of Science), Dan McCammon (University of
Wisconsin), Brian McNamara (University of Waterloo), Eric Miller (MIT), Jon Miller (University
of Michigan), Ikuyuki Mitsuishi (Nagoya University), Tsunefumi Mizuno (Hiroshima University),
KojiMori(UniversityofMiyazaki),HideyukiMori(NASA/GSFC),KojiMukai(NASA/GSFC),Hi-
roshiMurakami(TohokuGakuinUniversity),RichardMushotzky(UniversityofMaryland),Hiroshi
Nakajima(KantoGakuinUniversity),KazuhiroNakazawa(NagoyaUniversity),KumikoNobukawa
(Nara Women’s University), Masayoshi Nobukawa (Nara University of Education), Hirofumi Noda
(Osaka University), Hirokazu Odaka (University of Tokyo), Takaya Ohashi (Tokyo Metropolitan
University), Masahiro Ohno (Hiroshima University), Takashi Okajima (NASA/GSFC), Naomi Ota
(Nara Women’s University), Stephane Paltani (University of Geneva), Rob Petre (NASA/GSFC),
Paul Plucinsky (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics), F. Scott Porter (NASA/GSFC),
KatjaPottschmidt(NASA/GSFC),KosukeSato(SaitamaUniversity),ToshikiSato(RIKEN/NASA
GSFC),MakotoSawada(RIKEN),HiromiSeta(TokyoMetropolitanUniversity),MegumiShidatsu
(Ehime University), Aurora Simionescu (SRON), Randall Smith (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics), YangSoong(NASA/GSFC),YasuharuSugawara(ISAS/JAXA),AndySzymkowiak
(YaleUniversity),HiromitsuTakahashi(HiroshimaUniversity),ToruTamagawa(RIKEN),Takaaki
Tanaka (Kyoto University), Makoto Tashiro (Saitama University), Yukikatsu Terada (Saitama
31
Science with XRISM
University), Yuichi Terashima (Ehime University), Yohko Tsuboi (Chuo University), Masahiro
Tsujimoto (ISAS/JAXA), Hiroshi Tsunemi (Osaka University), Takeshi Tsuru (Kyoto Univer-
sity), HiroyukiUchida(KyotoUniversity), HidekiUchiyama(ShizuokaUniversity), YoshihiroUeda
(Kyoto University), Yuusuke Uhida (Hiroshima University), Shinichiro Uno (Nihon Fukushi Uni-
versity), Jacco Vink (University of Amsterdam), Shin Watanabe (ISAS/JAXA), Brian Williams
(NASA/GSFC),ShinyaYamada(TokyoMetropolitanUniversity),HiroyaYamaguchi(ISAS/JAXA),
KazutakaYamaoka(NagoyaUniversity), NorikoYamasaki(ISAS/JAXA),MakotoYamauchi(Uni-
versity of Miyazaki), Shigeo Yamauchi (Nara Women’s University), Tahir Yaqoob (NASA/GSFC),
Irina Zhuravleva (University of Chicago)
32
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
References
[1] Tashiro, M. et al. Concept of the X-ray Astronomy Recovery Mission. In Proc. SPIE,
vol. 10699 of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series,
1069922 (2018).
[2] Walker, S. A. et al. Is there a giant Kelvin-Helmholtz instability in the sloshing cold front of
the Perseus cluster? MNRAS 468, 2506–2516 (2017). 1705.00011.
[3] Hitomi Collaboration. The quiescent intracluster medium in the core of the Perseus cluster.
Nature 535, 117–121 (2016). 1607.04487.
[4] Kitayama, T.et al. ASTRO-HWhitePaper-ClustersofGalaxiesandRelatedScience. arXiv
e-prints (2014). 1412.1176.
[5] Kravtsov, A. V. & Borgani, S. Formation of Galaxy Clusters. ARA&A 50, 353–409 (2012).
1205.5556.
[6] Bykov, A. M. et al. Structures and Components in Galaxy Clusters: Observations and
Models. Space Sci. Rev. 188, 141–185 (2015). 1512.01456.
[7] Fabian, A. C. Observational Evidence of Active Galactic Nuclei Feedback. ARA&A 50,
455–489 (2012). 1204.4114.
[8] Werner, N., McNamara, B. R., Churazov, E. & Scannapieco, E. Hot Atmospheres, Cold
Gas, AGN Feedback and the Evolution of Early Type Galaxies: A Topical Perspective.
Space Sci. Rev. 215, 5 (2019). 1811.05004.
[9] Markevitch, M., Sarazin, C. L. & Vikhlinin, A. Physics of the Merging Clusters Cygnus A,
A3667, and A2065. ApJ 521, 526–530 (1999). astro-ph/9812005.
[10] Markevitch, M. & Vikhlinin, A. Shocks and cold fronts in galaxy clusters. Phys. Rep. 443,
1–53 (2007). astro-ph/0701821.
[11] Russell, H. R. et al. Chandra observation of two shock fronts in the merging galaxy cluster
Abell 2146. MNRAS 406, 1721–1733 (2010). 1004.1559.
[12] Akamatsu, H. et al. Suzaku X-Ray Observations of the Accreting NGC 4839 Group of
Galaxies and a Radio Relic in the Coma Cluster. PASJ 65, 89 (2013). 1302.2907.
[13] Ichinohe, Y. et al. The growth of the galaxy cluster Abell 85: mergers, shocks, stripping and
seeding of clumping. MNRAS 448, 2971–2986 (2015). 1410.1955.
[14] Uchida, Y. et al. Suzaku observations of a shock front tracing the western edge of the giant
radio halo in the Coma Cluster. PASJ 68, S20 (2016). 1509.01901.
[15] Canning, R. E. A. et al. A series of shocks and edges in Abell 2219. MNRAS 464, 2896–2909
(2017).
[16] Ueda, S. et al. A Cool Core Disturbed: Observational Evidence for the Coexistence of
Subsonic Sloshing Gas and Stripped Shock-heated Gas around the Core of RX J1347.5-1145.
ApJ 866, 48 (2018). 1808.09232.
33
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[17] Markevitch,M.et al. ChandraObservationofAbell2142: SurvivalofDenseSubclusterCores
in a Merger. ApJ 541, 542–549 (2000). astro-ph/0001269.
[18] Vikhlinin, A., Markevitch, M. & Murray, S. S. A Moving Cold Front in the Intergalactic
Medium of A3667. ApJ 551, 160–171 (2001). astro-ph/0008496.
[19] Roediger, E. et al. Gas sloshing, cold front formation and metal redistribution: the Virgo
cluster as a quantitative test case. MNRAS 413, 2057–2077 (2011). 1007.4209.
[20] ZuHone, J. A., Markevitch, M. & Lee, D. Sloshing of the Magnetized Cool Gas in the Cores
of Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 743, 16 (2011). 1108.4427.
[21] Nulsen, P. E. J. et al. Deep Chandra Observations of A2199: The Interplay between Merger-
induced Gas Motions and Nuclear Outbursts in a Cool Core Cluster. ApJ 775, 117 (2013).
1307.8072.
[22] Werner, N. et al. Deep Chandra observation and numerical studies of the nearest cluster cold
front in the sky. MNRAS 455, 846–858 (2016). 1506.06429.
[23] ZuHone, J. A., Markevitch, M. & Zhuravleva, I. Mapping the Gas Turbulence in the Coma
Cluster: Predictions for Astro-H. ApJ 817, 110 (2016). 1505.07848.
[24] Feretti, L., Giovannini, G., Govoni, F. & Murgia, M. Clusters of galaxies: observational
properties of the diffuse radio emission. A&A Rev. 20, 54 (2012). 1205.1919.
[25] Brunetti,G.&Jones,T.W. CosmicRaysinGalaxyClustersandTheirNonthermalEmission.
International Journal of Modern Physics D 23, 1430007–98 (2014). 1401.7519.
[26] Allen, S. W., Schmidt, R. W., Ebeling, H., Fabian, A. C. & van Speybroeck, L. Constraints
on dark energy from Chandra observations of the largest relaxed galaxy clusters. MNRAS
353, 457–467 (2004). astro-ph/0405340.
[27] Vikhlinin, A. et al. Chandra Cluster Cosmology Project III: Cosmological Parameter Con-
straints. ApJ 692, 1060–1074 (2009). 0812.2720.
[28] Rasia, E. et al. Systematics in the X-ray cluster mass estimators. MNRAS 369, 2013–2024
(2006). astro-ph/0602434.
[29] Lau, E. T., Kravtsov, A. V. & Nagai, D. Residual Gas Motions in the Intracluster Medium
and Bias in Hydrostatic Measurements of Mass Profiles of Clusters. ApJ 705, 1129–1138
(2009). 0903.4895.
[30] Zhuravleva,I.et al. QuantifyingpropertiesofICMinhomogeneities. MNRAS428,3274–3287
(2013). 1210.6706.
[31] Nelson, K., Lau, E. T. & Nagai, D. Hydrodynamic Simulation of Non-thermal Pressure
Profiles of Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 792, 25 (2014). 1404.4636.
[32] Shi, X., Komatsu, E., Nagai, D. & Lau, E. T. Analytical model for non-thermal pressure in
galaxy clusters - III. Removing the hydrostatic mass bias. MNRAS 455, 2936–2944 (2016).
1507.04338.
[33] Vazza, F. et al. The turbulent pressure support in galaxy clusters revisited. MNRAS 481,
L120–L124 (2018). 1809.02690.
34
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[34] Nagai, D., Lau, E. T., Avestruz, C., Nelson, K. & Rudd, D. H. Predicting Merger-induced
Gas Motions in ΛCDM Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 777, 137 (2013). 1307.2251.
[35] Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. First M87 Event Horizon Telescope Results.
VI. The Shadow and Mass of the Central Black Hole. ApJ 875, L6 (2019).
[36] Churazov, E., Forman, W., Jones, C. & B¨ohringer, H. Asymmetric, arc minute scale struc-
tures around NGC 1275. A&A 356, 788–794 (2000). astro-ph/0002375.
[37] McNamara, B. R. et al. Chandra X-Ray Observations of the Hydra A Cluster: An Interac-
tion between the Radio Source and the X-Ray-emitting Gas. ApJ 534, L135–L138 (2000).
astro-ph/0001402.
[38] Boehringer, H., Voges, W., Fabian, A. C., Edge, A. C. & Neumann, D. M. A ROSAT HRI
study of the interaction of the X-ray-emitting gas and radio lobes of NGC 1275. MNRAS
264, L25–L28 (1993).
[39] Churazov, E., Bru¨ggen, M., Kaiser, C.R., B¨ohringer, H.&Forman, W. EvolutionofBuoyant
Bubbles in M87. ApJ 554, 261–273 (2001). astro-ph/0008215.
[40] Fabian, A. C. et al. A deep Chandra observation of the Perseus cluster: shocks and ripples.
MNRAS 344, L43–L47 (2003). astro-ph/0306036.
[41] Sanders,J.S.,Fabian,A.C.,Allen,S.W.&Schmidt,R.W. Mappingsmall-scaletemperature
and abundance structures in the core of the Perseus cluster. MNRAS 349, 952–972 (2004).
astro-ph/0311502.
[42] Forman, W. et al. Filaments, Bubbles, and Weak Shocks in the Gaseous Atmosphere of M87.
ApJ 665, 1057–1066 (2007). astro-ph/0604583.
[43] McNamara, B. R. & Nulsen, P. E. J. Heating Hot Atmospheres with Active Galactic Nuclei.
ARA&A 45, 117–175 (2007). 0709.2152.
[44] Simionescu, A., Werner, N., Finoguenov, A., B¨ohringer, H. & Bru¨ggen, M. Metal-rich multi-
phase gas in M 87. AGN-driven metal transport, magnetic-field supported multi-temperature
gas,andconstraintsonnon-thermalemissionobservedwithXMM-Newton. A&A482,97–112
(2008). 0709.4499.
[45] Werner, N. et al. Feedback under the microscope-II. Heating, gas uplift and mixing in the
nearest cluster core. MNRAS 407, 2063–2074 (2010). 1003.5334.
[46] Fabian, A. C. et al. A wide Chandra view of the core of the Perseus cluster. MNRAS 418,
2154–2164 (2011). 1105.5025.
[47] Ar´evalo, P., Churazov, E., Zhuravleva, I., Forman, W.R.&Jones, C. OntheNatureofX-ray
Surface Brightness Fluctuations in M87. ApJ 818, 14 (2016). 1508.00013.
[48] Zhuravleva, I., Allen, S. W., Mantz, A. & Werner, N. Gas Perturbations in the Cool Cores of
GalaxyClusters: EffectiveEquationofState,VelocityPowerSpectra,andTurbulentHeating.
ApJ 865, 53 (2018). 1707.02304.
[49] Forman, W. et al. Partitioning the Outburst Energy of a Low Eddington Accretion Rate
AGN at the Center of an Elliptical Galaxy: The Recent 12 Myr History of the Supermassive
Black Hole in M87. ApJ 844, 122 (2017). 1705.01104.
35
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[50] Tanaka, Y. et al. Gravitationally redshifted emission implying an accretion disk and massive
black hole in the active galaxy MCG-6-30-15. Nature 375, 659–661 (1995).
[51] Fabian, A. C., Rees, M. J., Stella, L. & White, N. E. X-ray fluorescence from the inner disc
in Cygnus X-1. MNRAS 238, 729–736 (1989).
[52] Hagino, K. et al. A disc wind interpretation of the strong Fe Kα features in 1H 0707-495.
MNRAS 461, 3954–3963 (2016). 1509.05645.
[53] Zoghbi, A., Fabian, A. C., Reynolds, C. S. & Cackett, E. M. Relativistic iron K X-ray
reverberation in NGC 4151. MNRAS 422, 129–134 (2012). 1112.1717.
[54] Kara, E. et al. A global look at X-ray time lags in Seyfert galaxies. MNRAS 462, 511–531
(2016). 1605.02631.
[55] Chartas, G. et al. Measuring the Innermost Stable Circular Orbits of Supermassive Black
Holes. ApJ 837, 26 (2017). 1609.09490.
[56] HitomiCollaboration. AtmosphericgasdynamicsinthePerseusclusterobservedwithHitomi.
PASJ 70, 9 (2018). 1711.00240.
[57] Gandhi,P.,H¨onig,S.F.&Kishimoto,M. TheDustSublimationRadiusasanOuterEnvelope
to the Bulk of the Narrow Fe Kalpha Line Emission in Type 1 AGNs. ApJ 812, 113 (2015).
1502.02661.
[58] Minezaki, T. & Matsushita, K. A New Black Hole Mass Estimate for Obscured Active
Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 802, 98 (2015). 1501.07522.
[59] Miller, J. M. et al. X-Ray Structure between the Innermost Disk and Optical Broad-line
Region in NGC 4151. ApJ 865, 97 (2018). 1808.07435.
[60] Gardner, E. & Done, C. The origin of the UV/optical lags in NGC 5548. MNRAS 470,
3591–3605 (2017). 1603.09564.
[61] Edelson, R. et al. Swift Monitoring of NGC 4151: Evidence for a Second X-Ray/UV Repro-
cessing. ApJ 840, 41 (2017). 1703.06901.
[62] Matsushita, K., Finoguenov, A. & B¨ohringer, H. XMM observation of M 87. II. Abundance
structureoftheinterstellarandintergalacticmedium. A&A401, 443–461(2003). astro-ph/
0212069.
[63] de Plaa, J. et al. Constraining supernova models using the hot gas in clusters of galaxies.
A&A 465, 345–355 (2007). astro-ph/0701553.
[64] Simionescu, A. et al. Chemical enrichment in the cluster of galaxies Hydra A. A&A 493,
409–424 (2009). 0809.2613.
[65] Mernier, F. et al. Enrichment of the Hot Intracluster Medium: Observations. Space Sci. Rev.
214, 129 (2018). 1811.01967.
[66] HitomiCollaboration. Solarabundanceratiosoftheiron-peakelementsinthePerseuscluster.
Nature 551, 478–480 (2017). 1711.10035.
36
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[67] Simionescu, A. et al. Constraints on the chemical enrichment history of the Perseus Cluster
of galaxies from high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy. MNRAS 483, 1701–1721 (2019). 1806.
00932.
[68] De Rosa, G. et al. Evidence for Non-evolving Fe II/Mg II Ratios in Rapidly Accreting z ˜ 6
QSOs. ApJ 739, 56 (2011). 1106.5501.
[69] Tashiro, M. S. et al. ASTRO-H White Paper - Chemical Evolution in High-z Universe. arXiv
e-prints (2014). 1412.1179.
[70] Bulbul, E. et al. Detection of an Unidentified Emission Line in the Stacked X-Ray Spectrum
of Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 789, 13 (2014). 1402.2301.
[71] Boyarsky, A., Ruchayskiy, O., Iakubovskyi, D. & Franse, J. Unidentified Line in X-Ray
Spectraof the AndromedaGalaxy and PerseusGalaxy Cluster. Phys. Rev.Lett.113, 251301
(2014). 1402.4119.
[72] Aharonian,F.A.et al. HitomiConstraintsonthe3.5keVLineinthePerseusGalaxyCluster.
ApJ 837, L15 (2017). 1607.07420.
[73] Bregman, J. N. The Search for the Missing Baryons at Low Redshift. ARA&A 45, 221–259
(2007). 0706.1787.
[74] Shull,J.M.,Smith,B.D.&Danforth,C.W.TheBaryonCensusinaMultiphaseIntergalactic
Medium: 30% of the Baryons May Still be Missing. ApJ 759, 23 (2012). 1112.2706.
[75] Nicastro, F.et al. Observationsofthemissingbaryonsinthewarm-hotintergalacticmedium.
Nature 558, 406–409 (2018). 1806.08395.
[76] Finoguenov, A., Briel, U. G. & Henry, J. P. XMM-Newton discovery of an X-ray filament in
Coma. A&A 410, 777–784 (2003). astro-ph/0309019.
[77] Durret, F., Lima Neto, G. B., Forman, W. & Churazov, E. An XMM-Newton view of
the extended “filament” near the cluster of galaxies Abell 85. A&A 403, L29–L32 (2003).
astro-ph/0303486.
[78] Kaastra, J. S., Lieu, R., Tamura, T., Paerels, F. B. S. & den Herder, J. W. XMM-Newton
confirmation of soft X-ray excess emission in clusters of galaxies - The discovery of O VII
emissionfromanextendedwarmbaryoniccomponent. A&A397,445–462(2003). astro-ph/
0210684.
[79] Takei, Y. et al. Search for Oxygen Emission from Warm-Hot Intergalactic Medium around
A2218 with Suzaku. PASJ 59, 339–349 (2007). astro-ph/0608072.
[80] Zeegers, S. T. et al. Absorption and scattering by interstellar dust in the silicon K-edge of
GX 5-1. A&A 599, A117 (2017). 1612.07988.
[81] Zeegers, S. T. et al. Dust absorption and scattering in the silicon K-edge. A&A 627, A16
(2019). 1905.06560.
[82] Costantini, E. et al. XMM-Newton observation of 4U 1820-30. Broad band spectrum and the
contribution of the cold interstellar medium. A&A 539, A32 (2012). 1112.4349.
37
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[83] Pinto, C., Kaastra, J. S., Costantini, E. & de Vries, C. Interstellar medium composition
through X-ray spectroscopy of low-mass X-ray binaries. A&A 551, A25 (2013). 1301.1612.
[84] Valencic, L. A. & Smith, R. K. Interstellar Dust Properties from a Survey of X-Ray Halos.
ApJ 809, 66 (2015).
[85] Lee,J.C.,Xiang,J.,Ravel,B.,Kortright,J.&Flanagan,K. CondensedMatterAstrophysics:
A Prescription for Determining the Species-specific Composition and Quantity of Interstellar
Dust Using X-rays. ApJ 702, 970–979 (2009). 0906.3720.
[86] Corrales, L. R., Garc´ıa, J., Wilms, J. & Baganoff, F. The dust-scattering component of
X-ray extinction: effects on continuum fitting and high-resolution absorption edge structure.
MNRAS 458, 1345–1351 (2016). 1602.01100.
[87] Speck, A. K., Whittington, A. G. & Hofmeister, A. M. Disordered Silicates in Space: A
Study of Laboratory Spectra of “Amorphous” Silicates. ApJ 740, 93 (2011). 1108.0429.
[88] Mathis, J. S., Rumpl, W. & Nordsieck, K. H. The size distribution of interstellar grains. ApJ
217, 425–433 (1977).
[89] Draine, B. T. & Fraisse, A. A. Polarized Far-Infrared and Submillimeter Emission from
Interstellar Dust. ApJ 696, 1–11 (2009). 0809.2094.
[90] Rogantini, D. et al. Investigating the interstellar dust through the Fe K-edge. A&A 609,
A22 (2018). 1709.05359.
[91] Lee, J. C. & Ravel, B. Determining the Grain Composition of the Interstellar Medium with
High-Resolution X-Ray Spectroscopy. ApJ 622, 970–976 (2005). astro-ph/0412393.
[92] Costantini, E. et al. X-ray extinction from interstellar dust. Prospects of observing carbon,
sulfur, and other trace elements. A&A 629, A78 (2019). 1906.08653.
[93] Overbeck, J. W. Small-Angle Scattering of Celestial X-Rays by Interstellar Grains. ApJ 141,
864 (1965).
[94] Hayakawa,S.ScatteringofCosmicX-RaysbyInterstellarDustGrains.ProgressofTheoretical
Physics 43, 1224–1230 (1970).
[95] Mauche, C.W. & Gorenstein, P. Measurements of X-Ray Scattering from Interstellar Grains.
ApJ 302, 371 (1986).
[96] Heinz, S. et al. Lord of the Rings: A Kinematic Distance to Circinus X-1 from a Giant X-Ray
Light Echo. ApJ 806, 265 (2015). 1506.06142.
[97] Heinz, S. et al. A Joint Chandra and Swift View of the 2015 X-ray Dust-scattering Echo of
V404 Cygni. ApJ 825, 15 (2016). 1605.01648.
[98] Jenkins, E. B. A Unified Representation of Gas-Phase Element Depletions in the Interstellar
Medium. ApJ 700, 1299–1348 (2009). 0905.3173.
[99] Wilms, J., Allen, A. & McCray, R. On the Absorption of X-Rays in the Interstellar Medium.
ApJ 542, 914–924 (2000). astro-ph/0008425.
38
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[100] McCollough, M. L., Smith, R. K. & Valencic, L. A. Cygnus X-3’s Little Friend. ApJ 762, 2
(2013). 1211.2252.
[101] Koyama, K.et al. ASTRO-HWhitePaper-PlasmaDiagnosticandDynamicsoftheGalactic
Center Region. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1412.1170 (2014). 1412.1170.
[102] Muno, M. P. et al. A Deep Chandra Catalog of X-Ray Point Sources toward the Galactic
Center. ApJ 589, 225–241 (2003). astro-ph/0301371.
[103] Revnivtsev, M., Vikhlinin, A. & Sazonov, S. Resolving the Galactic ridge X-ray background.
A&A 473, 857–862 (2007). astro-ph/0611952.
[104] Zhu, Z., Li, Z. & Morris, M. R. An Ultradeep Chandra Catalog of X-Ray Point Sources in
the Galactic Center Star Cluster. ApJS 235, 26 (2018). 1802.05073.
[105] Nobukawa, M., Uchiyama, H., Nobukawa, K. K., Yamauchi, S. & Koyama, K. Origin of
the Galactic Diffuse X-Ray Emission: Iron K-shell Line Diagnostics. ApJ 833, 268 (2016).
1701.00884.
[106] Yamauchi, S., Nobukawa, K. K., Nobukawa, M., Uchiyama, H. & Koyama, K. Scale heights
and equivalent widths of the iron K-shell lines in the Galactic diffuse X-ray emission. PASJ
68, 59 (2016). 1604.07966.
[107] Inui, T., Koyama, K., Matsumoto, H. & Tsuru, T. G. Time Variability of the Neutral Iron
Lines from the Sagittarius B2 Region and Its Implication of a Past Outburst of Sagittarius
A. PASJ 61, S241 (2009).
[108] Odaka, H. et al. X-Ray Diagnostics of Giant Molecular Clouds in the Galactic Center Region
and Past Activity of Sgr A*. ApJ 740, 103 (2011). 1110.1936.
[109] Nobukawa, K. K. et al. Enhancement of the 6.4 keV Line in the Inner Galactic Ridge:
Proton-induced Fluorescence? ApJ 807, L10 (2015). 1506.00759.
[110] Lisse, C. M. et al. Discovery of X-ray and Extreme Ultraviolet Emission from Comet
C/Hyakutake 1996 B2. Science 274, 205–209 (1996).
[111] Cravens, T. E. Comet Hyakutake x-ray source: Charge transfer of solar wind heavy ions.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 24, 105–108 (1997).
[112] Robertson, I. P., Cravens, T. E., Snowden, S. & Linde, T. Temporal and Spatial Variations
of Heliospheric x-ray Emissions Associated with Charge Transfer of the Solar Wind with
Interstellar Neutrals. Space Sci. Rev. 97, 401–405 (2001).
[113] Cravens, T. E. et al. Implications of Jovian X-ray emission for magnetosphere-ionosphere
coupling. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 108, 1465 (2003).
[114] Hui, Y. et al. The Ion-induced Charge-exchange X-ray Emission of the Jovian Auroras:
Magnetospheric or Solar Wind Origin? ApJ 702, L158–L162 (2009). 0907.1672.
[115] Kuntz, K.D. Solarwindchargeexchange: anastrophysicalnuisance. A&ARev.27, 1(2019).
1811.06454.
[116] Galeazzi, M. et al. The origin of the local 1/4-keV X-ray flux in both charge exchange and a
hot bubble. Nature 512, 171–173 (2014). 1407.7539.
39
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[117] Lallement, R. On the contribution of charge-exchange induced X-ray emission in the ISM
and ICM. A&A 422, 391–400 (2004).
[118] Katsuda, S. et al. Possible Charge-exchange X-ray Emission in the Cygnus Loop Detected
with Suzaku. ApJ 730, 24 (2011). 1103.1669.
[119] Zhang, S. et al. Spectral Modeling of the Charge-exchange X-Ray Emission from M82. ApJ
794, 61 (2014). 1408.3207.
[120] Konami, S., Matsushita, K., Tsuru, T. G., Gand hi, P. & Tamagawa, T. Suzaku Metal
Abundance Patterns in the Outflow Region of M82 and the Importance of Charge Exchange.
PASJ 63, S913–S924 (2011). 1108.5778.
[121] Vazza, F., Bru¨ggen, M., Gheller, C. & Wang, P. On the amplification of magnetic fields in
cosmic filaments and galaxy clusters. MNRAS 445, 3706–3722 (2014). 1409.2640.
[122] Porter, D. H., Jones, T. W. & Ryu, D. Vorticity, Shocks, and Magnetic Fields in Subsonic,
ICM-like Turbulence. ApJ 810, 93 (2015). 1507.08737.
[123] Fujita, Y., Takizawa, M. & Sarazin, C. L. Nonthermal Emissions from Particles Accelerated
by Turbulence in Clusters of Galaxies. ApJ 584, 190–202 (2003). astro-ph/0210320.
[124] Brunetti, G.& Lazarian, A. Compressibleturbulence ingalaxyclusters: physics andstochas-
tic particle re-acceleration. MNRAS 378, 245–275 (2007). astro-ph/0703591.
[125] Miniati,F. TheMatryoshkaRun.II.Time-dependentTurbulenceStatistics,StochasticParti-
cle Acceleration, and Microphysics Impact in a Massive Galaxy Cluster. ApJ 800, 60 (2015).
1409.3576.
[126] Gilfanov, M. R., Syunyaev, R. A. & Churazov, E. M. Radial Brightness Profiles of Resonance
X-Ray Lines in Galaxy Clusters. Soviet Astronomy Letters 13, 3 (1987).
[127] Churazov, E., Zhuravleva, I., Sazonov, S. & Sunyaev, R. Resonant Scattering of X-ray
Emission Lines in the Hot Intergalactic Medium. Space Sci. Rev. 157, 193–209 (2010).
1007.3263.
[128] Gu, L. et al. X-Ray Spectroscopy of Galaxy Clusters: Beyond the CIE Modeling.
Space Sci. Rev. 214, 108 (2018). 1811.02101.
[129] de Plaa, J. et al. Estimating turbulent velocities in the elliptical galaxies NGC 5044 and
NGC 5813. A&A 539, A34 (2012). 1201.1910.
[130] Ogorzalek, A. et al. Improved measurements of turbulence in the hot gaseous atmospheres
of nearby giant elliptical galaxies. MNRAS 472, 1659–1676 (2017). 1702.04364.
[131] Hitomi Collaboration. Measurements of resonant scattering in the Perseus Cluster core with
Hitomi SXS. PASJ 70, 10 (2018). 1710.04648.
[132] Zhuravleva, I. V., Churazov, E. M., Sazonov, S. Y., Sunyaev, R. A. & Dolag, K. Resonant
scattering in galaxy clusters for anisotropic gas motions on various spatial scales. Astronomy
Letters 37, 141–153 (2011). 1102.4098.
[133] Zhuravleva, I. et al. Suppressed effective viscosity in the bulk intergalactic plasma. Nature
Astronomy 340 (2019). 1906.06346.
40
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[134] Zhuravleva, I., Churazov, E., Kravtsov, A. & Sunyaev, R. Constraints on the ICM velocity
power spectrum from the X-ray lines width and shift. MNRAS 422, 2712–2724 (2012).
1203.1057.
[135] Zhuravleva, I. et al. The Relation between Gas Density and Velocity Power Spectra in
GalaxyClusters: QualitativeTreatmentandCosmologicalSimulations. ApJ788,L13(2014).
1404.5306.
[136] Gaspari, M., Churazov, E., Nagai, D., Lau, E. T. & Zhuravleva, I. The relation between
gas density and velocity power spectra in galaxy clusters: High-resolution hydrodynamic
simulations and the role of conduction. A&A 569, A67 (2014). 1404.5302.
[137] Hitomi Collaboration. Hitomi observation of radio galaxy NGC 1275: The first X-ray mi-
crocalorimeter spectroscopy of Fe-Kα line emission from an active galactic nucleus. Publica-
tions of the Astronomical Society of Japan 70, 13 (2018). 1711.06289.
[138] Hitomi Collaboration et al. Temperature structure in the Perseus cluster core observed with
Hitomi. PASJ 70, 11 (2018). 1712.06612.
[139] Inoue, S. et al. Search for a non-equilibrium plasma in the merging galaxy cluster Abell 754.
PASJ 68, S23 (2016). 1603.01396.
[140] van Weeren, R. J. et al. Diffuse Radio Emission from Galaxy Clusters. Space Sci. Rev. 215,
16 (2019). 1901.04496.
[141] Harris, D. E. & Romanishin, W. Inverse Compton Radiation and the Magnetic Field in
Clusters of Galaxies. ApJ 188, 209–216 (1974).
[142] Wik, D. R. et al. NuSTAR Observations of the Bullet Cluster: Constraints on Inverse
Compton Emission. ApJ 792, 48 (2014). 1403.2722.
[143] Ueda, Y., Murakami, H., Yamaoka, K., Dotani, T. & Ebisawa, K. Chandra High-Resolution
Spectroscopy of the Absorption-Line Features in the Low-Mass X-Ray Binary GX 13+1. ApJ
609, 325–334 (2004).
[144] Miller, J. M. et al. Simultaneous Chandra and RXTE Spectroscopy of the Microquasar
H1743-322: Clues to Disk Wind and Jet Formation from a Variable Ionized Outflow. ApJ
646, 394–406 (2006). astro-ph/0406272.
[145] Miller, J. M. et al. The magnetic nature of disk accretion onto black holes. Nature 441,
953–955 (2006). astro-ph/0605390.
[146] D´ıaz Trigo, M., Parmar, A. N., Miller, J., Kuulkers, E. & Caballero-Garc´ıa, M. D. XMM-
Newton and INTEGRAL spectroscopy of the microquasar GRO J1655-40 during its 2005
outburst. A&A 462, 657–666 (2007). astro-ph/0610873.
[147] Neilsen, J. & Lee, J. C. Accretion disk winds as the jet suppression mechanism in the
microquasar GRS 1915+105. Nature 458, 481–484 (2009).
[148] King, A. L. et al. An Extreme X-Ray Disk Wind in the Black Hole Candidate IGR J17091-
3624. ApJ 746, L20 (2012). 1112.3648.
[149] King, A. L., Miller, J. M., Raymond, J., Reynolds, M. T. & Morningstar, W. High-resolution
ChandraHETGSpectroscopyofV404CygniinOutburst. ApJ813,L37(2015). 1508.01181.
41
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[150] Ponti, G. et al. Ubiquitous equatorial accretion disc winds in black hole soft states. MNRAS
422, L11–L15 (2012). 1201.4172.
[151] Miller, J. M., Raymond, J., Cackett, E., Grinberg, V. & Nowak, M. An Ultra-fast X-Ray
Disk Wind in the Neutron Star Binary GX 340+0. ApJ 822, L18 (2016). 1604.03329.
[152] Zoghbi, A. et al. Disk-Wind Connection during the Heartbeats of GRS 1915+105. ApJ 833,
165 (2016). 1610.05772.
[153] Reynolds, M. T. & Miller, J. M. Chandra Grating Spectroscopy of the Be/X-ray Binary 1A
0535+262. ApJ 723, 1799–1805 (2010). 1009.2240.
[154] Miller, J. M., Maitra, D., Cackett, E. M., Bhattacharyya, S. & Strohmayer, T. E. A Fast
X-ray Disk Wind in the Transient Pulsar IGR J17480-2446 in Terzan 5. ApJ 731, L7 (2011).
1101.2377.
[155] Degenaar, N. et al. High-resolution X-Ray Spectroscopy of the Bursting Pulsar GRO J1744-
28. ApJ 796, L9 (2014). 1410.4841.
[156] Mauche, C. W. & Raymond, J. C. IUE Observations of the Dwarf Nova HL Canis Majoris
and the Winds of Cataclysmic Variables. ApJ 323, 690 (1987).
[157] Mauche, C. W. & Raymond, J. C. Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Observations of OY Carinae
in Superoutburst. ApJ 541, 924–936 (2000).
[158] Long, K.S., Mauche, C.W., Raymond, J.C., Szkody, P.&Mattei, J.A. EUVEObservations
of U Geminorum in Outburst. ApJ 469, 841 (1996).
[159] Long, K. S. et al. WZ Sagittae: FUSE Spectroscopy of the 2001 Outburst. ApJ 591, 1172–
1183 (2003). astro-ph/0303537.
[160] Wheatley, P. J. & Mauche, C. W. Chandra X-ray Observations of WZ Sge in Superoutburst.
In Hameury, J. M. & Lasota, J. P. (eds.) The Astrophysics of Cataclysmic Variables and
Related Objects, vol.330ofAstronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, 257(2005).
astro-ph/0412166.
[161] King, A. L. et al. Regulation of Black Hole Winds and Jets across the Mass Scale. ApJ 762,
103 (2013). 1205.4222.
[162] Martini, P. QSO Lifetimes. In Ho, L. C. (ed.) Coevolution of Black Holes and Galaxies, 169
(2004). astro-ph/0304009.
[163] Remillard, R. A. & McClintock, J. E. X-Ray Properties of Black-Hole Binaries. ARA&A 44,
49–92 (2006). astro-ph/0606352.
[164] Reynolds, M. T. & Miller, J. M. A Swift Survey of Accretion onto Stellar-mass Black Holes.
ApJ 769, 16 (2013). 1112.2249.
[165] Miller, J. M. et al. Powerful, Rotating Disk Winds from Stellar-mass Black Holes. ApJ 814,
87 (2015). 1510.01177.
[166] Miller, J. M. et al. The Accretion Disk Wind in the Black Hole GRS 1915+105. ApJ 821,
L9 (2016). 1603.01474.
42
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[167] Fukumura, K. et al. Magnetic origin of black hole winds across the mass scale. Nature
Astronomy 1, 0062 (2017). 1702.02197.
[168] Higginbottom, N., Proga, D., Knigge, C. & Long, K. S. Thermal Disk Winds in X-Ray
Binaries: Realistic Heating and Cooling Rates Give Rise to Slow, but Massive, Outflows.
ApJ 836, 42 (2017). 1612.08996.
[169] Done, C., Tomaru, R. & Takahashi, T. Thermal winds in stellar mass black hole and neutron
star binary systems. MNRAS 473, 838–848 (2018). 1612.09377.
[170] Waters, T. & Proga, D. Magnetothermal disc winds in X-ray binaries: poloidal magnetic
fields suppress thermal winds. MNRAS 481, 2628–2645 (2018). 1806.07322.
[171] Fender, R. P., Belloni, T. M. & Gallo, E. Towards a unified model for black hole X-ray binary
jets. MNRAS 355, 1105–1118 (2004). astro-ph/0409360.
[172] Livio, M., Pringle, J. E. & King, A. R. The Disk-Jet Connection in Microquasars and Active
Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 593, 184–188 (2003). astro-ph/0304367.
[173] Begelman, M. C., Armitage, P. J. & Reynolds, C. S. Accretion Disk Dynamo as the Trigger
for X-Ray Binary State Transitions. ApJ 809, 118 (2015). 1507.03996.
[174] Miller, J. M. et al. The Accretion Disk Wind in the Black Hole GRO J1655-40. ApJ 680,
1359–1377 (2008). 0802.2026.
[175] Mao, J. et al. Density diagnostics of ionized outflows in active galactic nuclei. X-ray and UV
absorption lines from metastable levels in Be-like to C-like ions. A&A 607, A100 (2017).
1707.09552.
[176] D´ıaz Trigo, M., Parmar, A. N., Boirin, L., M´endez, M. & Kaastra, J. S. Spectral changes
duringdippinginlow-massX-raybinariesduetohighly-ionizedabsorbers. A&A445,179–195
(2006). astro-ph/0509342.
[177] Narayan, R. & Yi, I. Advection-dominated Accretion: A Self-similar Solution. ApJ 428, L13
(1994). astro-ph/9403052.
[178] Esin, A. A., McClintock, J. E. & Narayan, R. Advection-Dominated Accretion and the
Spectral States of Black Hole X-Ray Binaries: Application to Nova Muscae 1991. ApJ 489,
865–889 (1997). astro-ph/9705237.
[179] Blandford, R.D.&Znajek, R.L. ElectromagneticextractionofenergyfromKerrblackholes.
MNRAS 179, 433–456 (1977).
[180] McKinney, J. C., Tchekhovskoy, A. & Bland ford, R. D. General relativistic magnetohy-
drodynamic simulations of magnetically choked accretion flows around black holes. MNRAS
423, 3083–3117 (2012). 1201.4163.
[181] Mukai, K. et al. ASTRO-H White Paper - White Dwarf. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1412.1163
(2014). 1412.1163.
[182] Torrej´on, J. M. et al. On the Radial Onset of Clumping in the Wind of the B0I Massive Star
QV Nor. ApJ 810, 102 (2015).
43
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[183] Mart´ınez-Nu´n˜ez,S.et al. TowardsaUnifiedViewofInhomogeneousStellarWindsinIsolated
Supergiant Stars and Supergiant High Mass X-Ray Binaries. Space Sci. Rev. 212, 59–150
(2017). 1701.08618.
[184] Bachetti, M. et al. An ultraluminous X-ray source powered by an accreting neutron star.
Nature 514, 202–204 (2014). 1410.3590.
[185] Fu¨rst, F. et al. Discovery of Coherent Pulsations from the Ultraluminous X-Ray Source NGC
7793 P13. ApJ 831, L14 (2016). 1609.07129.
[186] Israel, G. L. et al. An accreting pulsar with extreme properties drives an ultraluminous x-ray
source in NGC 5907. Science 355, 817–819 (2017). 1609.07375.
[187] Israel, G. L. et al. An accreting pulsar with extreme properties drives an ultraluminous x-ray
source in NGC 5907. Science 355, 817–819 (2017). 1609.07375.
[188] Kubota, K. et al. Suzaku X-Ray and Optical Spectroscopic Observations of SS 433 in the
2006 April Multiwavelength Campaign. PASJ 62, 323 (2010). 1001.2989.
[189] Marshall, H. L. et al. Multiwavelength Observations of the SS 433 Jets. ApJ 775, 75 (2013).
1307.8427.
[190] Pinto, C., Middleton, M. J. & Fabian, A. C. Resolved atomic lines reveal outflows in two
ultraluminous X-ray sources. Nature 533, 64–67 (2016). 1604.08593.
[191] Hayashi, T. & Ishida, M. Application of the new comprehensive X-ray spectral model to the
two brightest intermediate polars EX Hydrae and V1223 Sagittarii. MNRAS 441, 3718–3723
(2014).
[192] Terada, Y., Ishida, M. & Makishima, K. The Anisotropic Transfer of Resonance Photons in
Hot Plasmas on Magnetized White Dwarfs. PASJ 56, 533–546 (2004). astro-ph/0403576.
[193] ALMA Partnership et al. The 2014 ALMA Long Baseline Campaign: First Results from
High Angular Resolution Observations toward the HL Tau Region. ApJ 808, L3 (2015).
1503.02649.
[194] Audard, M. et al. Episodic Accretion in Young Stars. In Beuther, H., Klessen, R. S.,
Dullemond, C. P. & Henning, T. (eds.) Protostars and Planets VI, 387 (2014). 1401.3368.
[195] Wolk, S. J., Bourke, T. L., Smith, R. K., Spitzbart, B. & Alves, J. Discovery of Nonthermal
X-Ray Emission from the Embedded Massive Star-forming Region RCW 38. ApJ 580, L161–
L165 (2002).
[196] Townsley, L. K. et al. 10 MK Gas in M17 and the Rosette Nebula: X-Ray Flows in Galactic
H II Regions. ApJ 593, 874–905 (2003). astro-ph/0305133.
[197] Hyodo, Y. et al. Suzaku Spectroscopy of Extended X-Ray Emission in M17. PASJ 60, S85
(2008). 0707.4074.
[198] Hamaguchi, K.et al. SuzakuObservationofDiffuseX-RayEmissionfromtheCarinaNebula.
PASJ 59, 151–161 (2007). astro-ph/0610024.
[199] Ezoe, Y. et al. Suzaku and XMM-Newton Observations of Diffuse X-Ray Emission from the
Eastern Tip Region of the Carina Nebula. PASJ 61, S123 (2009).
44
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[200] Townsley, L.K.et al. TheIntegratedDiffuseX-rayEmissionoftheCarinaNebulaCompared
to Other Massive Star-forming Regions. ApJS 194, 16 (2011). 1103.1606.
[201] Gu¨del, M. et al. Million-Degree Plasma Pervading the Extended Orion Nebula. Science 319,
309 (2008). 0712.0476.
[202] Hamaguchi, K. et al. A Smoking Gun in the Carina Nebula. ApJ 695, L4–L9 (2009).
0902.4162.
[203] Pires, A. M., Motch, C., Turolla, R., Treves, A. & Popov, S. B. The isolated neutron star
candidate 2XMM J104608.7-594306. A&A 498, 233–240 (2009). 0812.4151.
[204] Hughes, J. P. et al. ASTRO-H White Paper - Young Supernova Remnants. arXiv e-prints
arXiv:1412.1169 (2014). 1412.1169.
[205] Long, K. S. et al. ASTRO-H White Paper - Older Supernova Remnants and Pulsar Wind
Nebulae. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1412.1166 (2014). 1412.1166.
[206] Smith, R. K. et al. ASTRO-H White Paper - New Spectral Features. arXiv e-prints
arXiv:1412.1172 (2014). 1412.1172.
[207] Maoz, D., Mannucci, F. & Nelemans, G. Observational Clues to the Progenitors of Type Ia
Supernovae. ARA&A 52, 107–170 (2014). 1312.0628.
[208] Nomoto,K.&Leung,S.-C. Thermonuclear Explosions of Chandrasekhar Mass White Dwarfs,
1275 (2017).
[209] Seitenzahl, I. R. & Townsley, D. M. Nucleosynthesis in Thermonuclear Supernovae, 1955
(2017).
[210] Yamaguchi, H. et al. A Chandrasekhar Mass Progenitor for the Type Ia Supernova Remnant
3C 397 from the Enhanced Abundances of Nickel and Manganese. ApJ 801, L31 (2015).
1502.04255.
[211] Mart´ınez-Rodr´ıguez, H. et al. Observational Evidence for High Neutronization in Supernova
Remnants: ImplicationsforTypeIaSupernovaProgenitors.ApJ843,35(2017).1701.07073.
[212] Hughes, J. P., Rakowski, C. E., Burrows, D. N. & Slane, P. O. Nucleosynthesis and Mixing
in Cassiopeia A. ApJ 528, L109–L113 (2000). astro-ph/9910474.
[213] DeLaney, T. et al. The Three-dimensional Structure of Cassiopeia A. ApJ 725, 2038–2058
(2010). 1011.3858.
[214] Williams,B.J.et al. TheThree-dimensionalExpansionoftheEjectafromTycho’sSupernova
Remnant. ApJ 842, 28 (2017). 1705.05405.
[215] Sato,T.&Hughes,J.P.DirectEjectaVelocityMeasurementsofTycho’sSupernovaRemnant.
ApJ 840, 112 (2017). 1605.09059.
[216] Hitomi Collaboration et al. Hitomi observations of the LMC SNR N 132 D: Highly redshifted
X-ray emission from iron ejecta. PASJ 70, 16 (2018). 1712.02365.
[217] Miceli, M. et al. Collisionless shock heating of heavy ions in SN 1987A. Nature Astronomy
3, 236–241 (2019). 1901.10336.
45
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[218] Ozawa, M., Koyama, K., Yamaguchi, H., Masai, K. & Tamagawa, T. Suzaku Discovery of
theStrongRadiativeRecombinationContinuumofIronfromtheSupernovaRemnantW49B.
ApJ 706, L71–L75 (2009). 0910.3302.
[219] Yamaguchi, H. et al. Discovery of Strong Radiative Recombination Continua from the Su-
pernova Remnant IC 443 with Suzaku. ApJ 705, L6–L9 (2009). 0909.3848.
[220] Uchida, H. et al. High Forbidden-to-resonance Line Ratio of O VII Discovered from the
Cygnus Loop. ApJ 871, 234 (2019). 1812.06616.
[221] Lammer,H.etal.AtmosphericLossofExoplanetsResultingfromStellarX-RayandExtreme-
Ultraviolet Heating. ApJ 598, L121–L124 (2003).
[222] Sanz-Forcada, J. et al. A scenario of planet erosion by coronal radiation. A&A 511, L8
(2010). 1002.1875.
[223] Poppenhaeger, K., Schmitt, J. H. M. M. & Wolk, S. J. Transit Observations of the Hot
Jupiter HD 189733b at X-Ray Wavelengths. ApJ 773, 62 (2013). 1306.2311.
[224] Wolk, S. J. et al. X-ray Studies of Exoplanets: A 2020 Decadal Survey White Paper. arXiv
e-prints (2019). 1904.04320.
[225] Bardeen, J. M. Kerr Metric Black Holes. Nature 226, 64–65 (1970).
[226] Volonteri, M., Madau, P., Quataert, E.&Rees, M.J. TheDistributionandCosmicEvolution
of Massive Black Hole Spins. ApJ 620, 69–77 (2005). astro-ph/0410342.
[227] Schnittman, J. D. & Krolik, J. H. X-ray Polarization from Accreting Black Holes: The
Thermal State. ApJ 701, 1175–1187 (2009). 0902.3982.
[228] Kara, E. et al. The corona contracts in a black-hole transient. Nature 565, 198–201 (2019).
1901.03877.
[229] Motta, S. E., Belloni, T. M., Stella, L., Mun˜oz-Darias, T. & Fender, R. Precise mass and spin
measurements for a stellar-mass black hole through X-ray timing: the case of GRO J1655-40.
MNRAS 437, 2554–2565 (2014). 1309.3652.
[230] Fender, R. & Mun˜oz-Darias, T. The Balance of Power: Accretion and Feedback in Stellar
Mass Black Holes, vol. 905, 65 (2016).
[231] Shields, G. A., McKee, C. F., Lin, D. N. C. & Begelman, M. C. Compton-heated Winds and
Coronae above Accretion Disks. III. Instability and Oscillations. ApJ 306, 90 (1986).
[232] Markoff, S., Nowak, M. A. & Wilms, J. Going with the Flow: Can the Base of Jets Subsume
the Role of Compact Accretion Disk Coronae? ApJ 635, 1203–1216 (2005). astro-ph/
0509028.
[233] Corrales, L. R. & Paerels, F. The dust scattering halo of Cygnus X-3. MNRAS 453, 1121–
1135 (2015). 1311.5588.
[234] Smith, R. K., Dame, T. M., Costantini, E. & Predehl, P. The X-Ray Halo of GX 5-1. ApJ
648, 452–460 (2006). astro-ph/0605199.
46
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[235] Kalemci, E., Maccarone, T. J. & Tomsick, J. A. A Dust-scattering Halo of 4U 1630-47
Observed with Chandra and Swift: New Constraints on the Source Distance. ApJ 859, 88
(2018). 1804.02909.
[236] Miller, J. M. et al. Flows of X-ray gas reveal the disruption of a star by a massive black hole.
Nature 526, 542–545 (2015). 1510.06348.
[237] Bae, H.-J. et al. The Limited Impact of Outflows: Integral-field Spectroscopy of 20 Local
AGNs. ApJ 837, 91 (2017). 1702.01900.
[238] Rupke, D. A Review of Recent Observations of Galactic Winds Driven by Star Formation.
Galaxies 6, 138 (2018). 1812.05184.
[239] Cicone, C. et al. ALMA [C I]3 P -3 P Observations of NGC 6240: A Puzzling Molecular
1 0
Outflow, and the Role of Outflows in the Global α Factor of (U)LIRGs. ApJ 863, 143
CO
(2018). 1807.06015.
[240] Strickland, D. K.&Heckman, T.M. SupernovaFeedback Efficiencyand MassLoading inthe
Starburst and Galactic Superwind Exemplar M82. ApJ 697, 2030–2056 (2009). 0903.4175.
[241] Mitsuishi, I., Yamasaki, N. Y. & Takei, Y. Fe K Line Complex in the Nuclear Region of NGC
253. ApJ 742, L31 (2011). 1110.5407.
[242] Liu, J., Gou, L., Yuan, W. & Mao, S. Fe K lines in the nuclear region of M82. MNRAS 437,
L76–L80 (2014). 1310.4256.
[243] Tombesi, F. et al. Unification of X-ray winds in Seyfert galaxies: from ultra-fast outflows to
warm absorbers. MNRAS 430, 1102–1117 (2013). 1212.4851.
[244] Tombesi, F. et al. Wind from the black-hole accretion disk driving a molecular outflow in an
active galaxy. Nature 519, 436–438 (2015). 1501.07664.
[245] McNamara, B. R. & Nulsen, P. E. J. Heating Hot Atmospheres with Active Galactic Nuclei.
ARA&A 45, 117–175 (2007). 0709.2152.
[246] McNamara, B. R. & Nulsen, P. E. J. Mechanical feedback from active galactic nuclei in
galaxies, groups and clusters. New Journal of Physics 14, 055023 (2012). 1204.0006.
[247] Eckert, D. et al. On the Connection between Turbulent Motions and Particle Acceleration in
Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 843, L29 (2017). 1705.02341.
[248] Bonafede, A. et al. LOFAR discoveryof radio emission in MACS J0717.5+3745. MNRAS
478, 2927–2938 (2018). 1805.00473.
[249] Shimwell, T. W. et al. The LOFAR Two-metre Sky Survey. II. First data release. A&A 622,
A1 (2019). 1811.07926.
[250] Intema, H. T., Jagannathan, P., Mooley, K. P. & Frail, D. A. The GMRT 150 MHz all-sky
radiosurvey.FirstalternativedatareleaseTGSSADR1. A&A598,A78(2017). 1603.04368.
[251] Draine, B.T. ScatteringbyInterstellarDustGrains.II.X-Rays. ApJ598, 1026–1037(2003).
astro-ph/0308251.
47
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[252] Ota, N., Nagai, D. & Lau, E. T. Constraining hydrostatic mass bias of galaxy clusters with
high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy. PASJ 70, 51 (2018). 1507.02730.
[253] Rebusco, P., Churazov, E., Sunyaev, R., B¨ohringer, H. & Forman, W. Width of X-ray lines
as a diagnostic of gas motions in cooling flows. MNRAS 384, 1511–1518 (2008).
[254] Churazov, E. et al. X-ray surface brightness and gas density fluctuations in the Coma cluster.
MNRAS 421, 1123–1135 (2012). 1110.5875.
[255] Bonafede, A. et al. LOFAR discoveryof radio emission in MACS J0717.5+3745. MNRAS
478, 2927–2938 (2018). 1805.00473.
[256] ZuHone, J. A., Miller, E. D., Simionescu, A. & Bautz, M. W. Simulating Astro-H Ob-
servations of Sloshing Gas Motions in the Cores of Galaxy Clusters. ApJ 821, 6 (2016).
1508.04426.
[257] ZuHone, J. A., Miller, E. D., Bulbul, E. & Zhuravleva, I. What Do the Hitomi Observations
Tell Us About the Turbulent Velocities in the Perseus Cluster? Probing the Velocity Field
with Mock Observations. ApJ 853, 180 (2018). 1708.07206.
[258] Lau, E. T., Gaspari, M., Nagai, D. & Coppi, P. Physical Origins of Gas Motions in Galaxy
Cluster Cores: Interpreting Hitomi Observations of the Perseus Cluster. ApJ 849, 54 (2017).
1705.06280.
[259] Hillel, S. & Soker, N. Hitomi observations of Perseus support heating by mixing. MNRAS
466, L39–L42 (2017). 1608.07818.
[260] Bourne, M. A. & Sijacki, D. AGN jet feedback on a moving mesh: cocoon inflation, gas flows
and turbulence. MNRAS 472, 4707–4735 (2017). 1705.07900.
[261] Fabian, A. C. et al. Do sound waves transport the AGN energy in the Perseus cluster?
MNRAS 464, L1–L5 (2017). 1608.07088.
[262] Hopkins,A.M.&Beacom,J.F. OntheNormalizationoftheCosmicStarFormationHistory.
ApJ 651, 142–154 (2006). astro-ph/0601463.
[263] Madau, P. & Dickinson, M. Cosmic Star-Formation History. ARA&A 52, 415–486 (2014).
1403.0007.
[264] Sanders, J. S., Fabian, A. C. & Smith, R. K. Constraints on turbulent velocity broadening
for a sample of clusters, groups and elliptical galaxies using XMM-Newton. MNRAS 410,
1797–1812 (2011). 1008.3500.
[265] Pinto, C. et al. Chemical Enrichment RGS cluster Sample (CHEERS): Constraints on tur-
bulence. A&A 575, A38 (2015). 1501.01069.
[266] Werner, N. et al. Constraints on turbulent pressure in the X-ray haloes of giant elliptical
galaxies from resonant scattering. MNRAS 398, 23–32 (2009). 0904.0254.
[267] Zhuravleva, I. et al. Turbulent heating in galaxy clusters brightest in X-rays. Nature 515,
85–87 (2014). 1410.6485.
48
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[268] Walker, S. A., Sanders, J. S. & Fabian, A. C. What fraction of the density fluctuations in
the Perseus cluster core is due to gas sloshing rather than AGN feedback? MNRAS 481,
1718–1725 (2018). 1808.10460.
[269] Hitomi Collaboration et al. Atomic data and spectral modeling constraints from high-
resolution X-ray observations of the Perseus cluster with Hitomi. PASJ 70, 12 (2018).
1712.05407.
[270] ZuHone, J. A., Markevitch, M. & Johnson, R. E. Stirring Up the Pot: Can Cooling Flows in
Galaxy Clusters be Quenched by Gas Sloshing? ApJ 717, 908–928 (2010). 0912.0237.
[271] Ettori, S. & Fabian, A. C. Chandra constraints on the thermal conduction in the intracluster
plasma of A2142. MNRAS 317, L57–L59 (2000). astro-ph/0007397.
[272] Roediger, E. et al. Stripped Elliptical Galaxies as Probes of ICM Physics: II. Stirred, but
Mixed? ViscousandInviscidGasStrippingoftheVirgoEllipticalM89. ApJ806, 104(2015).
1409.6312.
[273] Kraft, R. P. et al. Stripped Elliptical Galaxies as Probes of ICM Physics. III. Deep Chandra
Observations of NGC 4552: Measuring the Viscosity of the Intracluster Medium. ApJ 848,
27 (2017). 1709.02784.
[274] Su, Y. et al. Deep Chandra Observations of NGC 1404: Cluster Plasma Physics Revealed by
an Infalling Early-type Galaxy. ApJ 834, 74 (2017). 1612.00535.
[275] Mukai, K., Rana, V., Bernardini, F. & de Martino, D. Unambiguous Detection of Reflection
in Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables: Joint NuSTAR-XMM-Newton Observations of Three
Intermediate Polars. ApJ 807, L30 (2015). 1506.07213.
[276] Brunetti, G., Setti, G., Feretti, L. & Giovannini, G. Particle reacceleration in the Coma
cluster: radio properties and hard X-ray emission. MNRAS 320, 365–378 (2001). astro-ph/
0008518.
[277] Brunetti,G.&Jones,T.W. CosmicRaysinGalaxyClustersandTheirNonthermalEmission.
International Journal of Modern Physics D 23, 1430007–98 (2014). 1401.7519.
[278] Kastner, J. H., Huenemoerder, D. P., Schulz, N. S., Canizares, C. R. & Weintraub, D. A.
Evidence for Accretion: High-Resolution X-Ray Spectroscopy of the Classical T Tauri Star
TW Hydrae. ApJ 567, 434–440 (2002). astro-ph/0111049.
[279] Brickhouse, N. S., Cranmer, S. R., Dupree, A. K., Luna, G. J. M. & Wolk, S. A Deep
Chandra X-Ray Spectrum of the Accreting Young Star TW Hydrae. ApJ 710, 1835–1847
(2010). 1001.0750.
[280] Imanishi, K., Koyama, K. & Tsuboi, Y. Chandra Observation of the ρ Ophiuchi Cloud. ApJ
557, 747–760 (2001).
[281] Sukhbold,T.,Ertl,T.,Woosley,S.E.,Brown,J.M.&Janka,H.T. Core-collapseSupernovae
from 9 to 120 Solar Masses Based on Neutrino-powered Explosions. ApJ 821, 38 (2016).
1510.04643.
[282] Boulanger, F., Cox, P. & Jones, A. P. Course 7: Dust in the Interstellar Medium. In Casoli,
F., Lequeux, J. & David, F. (eds.) Infrared Space Astronomy, Today and Tomorrow, vol. 70,
251 (2000).
49
Science with XRISM REFERENCES
[283] Savage, B. D. & Sembach, K. R. Interstellar Gas-Phase Abundances and Physical Conditions
toward Two Distant High-Latitude Halo Stars. ApJ 470, 893 (1996).
[284] Tielens, A. G. G. M. The Composition of Circumstellar and Interstellar Dust. In Wood-
ward, C. E., Bicay, M. D. & Shull, J. M. (eds.) Tetons 4: Galactic Structure, Stars and the
Interstellar Medium, vol. 231 of Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, 92
(2001).
[285] Smith, R. K. & Dwek, E. Soft X-Ray Scattering and Halos from Dust. ApJ 503, 831–842
(1998). astro-ph/9710232.
[286] Totani, T. A RIAF Interpretation for the Past Higher Activity of the Galactic Center Black
Hole and the 511 keV Annihilation Emission. PASJ 58, 965–977 (2006). astro-ph/0607414.
[287] Nakashima, S. et al. Discovery of the Recombining Plasma in the South of the Galactic
Center: A Relic of the Past Galactic Center Activity? ApJ 773, 20 (2013). 1310.4236.
[288] Nakashima, S., Koyama, K., Wang, Q. D. & Enokiya, R. X-Ray Observation of a Magnetized
Hot Gas Outflow in the Galactic Center Region. ApJ 875, 32 (2019). 1903.02571.
[289] Ponti,G.etal. AnX-raychimneyextendinghundredsofparsecsaboveandbelowtheGalactic
Centre. Nature 567, 347–350 (2019). 1904.05969.
[290] Ono, A. et al. X-ray spectra of Sagittarius A East and diffuse X-ray background near the
Galactic center. PASJ 71, 52 (2019). 1902.08386.
[291] Su, M., Slatyer, T. R. & Finkbeiner, D. P. Giant Gamma-ray Bubbles from Fermi-LAT:
Active Galactic Nucleus Activity or Bipolar Galactic Wind? ApJ 724, 1044–1082 (2010).
1005.5480.
[292] Liu, J., Mao, S. & Wang, Q. D. Charge-exchange X-ray emission of M82: Kα triplets of O
VII, Ne IX and Mg XI. MNRAS 415, L64–L68 (2011). 1105.3539.
50
