Small Data Explainer - The impact of small
data methods in everyday life
Maren Hackenberg#1,2, Sophia G Connor1, Fabian Kabus1, June Brawner3, Ella
Markham3,4, Mahi Hardalupas3, Areeq Chowdhury3, Rolf Backofen5,6, Anna Köttgen7,
Angelika Rohde8, Nadine Binder2,9, Harald Binder1,2,6, and the Collaborative Research
Center 1597 Small Data
1InstituteofMedicalBiometryandStatistics,FacultyofMedicineandMedicalCenter,UniversityofFreiburg,
Freiburg,Germany
2FreiburgCenterforDataAnalysis,ModelingandAI,UniversityofFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany
3TheRoyalSociety,London,UnitedKingdom
4UniversityofEdinburgh,Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom
5DepartmentofComputerScience,FacultyofEngineering,UniversityofFreiburg,Germany
6CentreforIntegrativeBiologicalSignallingStudies(CIBSS),UniversityofFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany
7InstituteofGeneticEpidemiology,FacultyofMedicineandMedicalCenter,UniversityofFreiburg,Germany
8DepartmentofMathematicalStochastics,FacultyofMathematicsandPhysics,UniversityofFreiburg,
Germany
9InstituteofGeneralPractice/FamilyMedicine,FacultyofMedicineandMedicalCenter,Universityof
Freiburg,Germany
#Correspondingauthor: maren.hackenberg@uniklinik-freiburg.de
Abstract
Theemergenceofbreakthroughartificialintelligence(AI)techniqueshasledtoare-
newedfocusonhowsmalldatasettings,i.e.,settingswithlimitedinformation,canbenefit
fromsuchdevelopments. Thisincludessocietalissuessuchashowbesttoincludeunder-
represented groups in data-driven policy and decision making, or the health benefits of
assistive technologies such as wearables. We provide a conceptual overview, in partic-
ular contrasting small data with big data, and identify common themes from exemplary
case studies and application areas. Potential solutions are described in a more detailed
technicaloverviewofcurrentdataanalysisandmodellingtechniques,highlightingcontri-
butionsfromdifferentdisciplines,suchasknowledge-drivenmodellingfromstatisticsand
data-drivenmodellingfromcomputerscience. Bylinkingapplicationsettings,conceptual
contributions and specific techniques, we highlight what is already feasible and suggest
whatanagendaforfullyleveragingsmalldatamightlooklike.
1
5202
luJ
51
]YC.sc[
1v37711.7052:viXra
1 Introduction
Inrecentyears,therehasbeenanincreasingrecognitionofthepotentialofsmalldataintechnology
development and decision-making processes, complementing and potentially even outpacing the
trajectoryseenforbigdata[1]–[5]. Whilethereisnoconsensusonthedefinitionofsmalldata,small
data approaches are typically needed in scenarios where there is a limited amount of information,
such as the analysis of a small number of observations in a dataset. Whether a dataset is con-
sidered small also depends on the amount of heterogeneity between observations. For example,
a clinical patient dataset with six patients might be considered small, while an experiment with six
mice in biomedical research would not be considered small, due to large diversity in human beings
as compared to animal models in biomedical research. A further important factor is the complexity
ofthequestionstobeexploredwithadataset. Forexample,traininglargelanguagemodels(LLMs)
withmachinelearningtechniquesrequiresvasttrainingdatasetsofmillionsorbillionsofdocuments.
ThetrainingofaspecialisedLLMwithonlythousandsofdocumentsthenisasmalldatachallenge,
while the use of simpler statistical modelling techniques with clinical patient data might only face a
smalldatachallengewhenthenumberofobservationsisbelowafewdozenpatients.
Insightsfromsmalldataareparticularlyvaluableinscenarioswherelargedatasetsarenotavailable
or where unique and specific data points can provide critical understanding [1], [6]. Unlike big data
approaches, which rely on vast datasets to identify overall trends and patterns, small data derives
insights from smaller and often more homogenous datasets, which might put the focus on specific,
sometimes overlooked subgroups of a population and thus address diversity in a targeted way [1],
[7]. Even when there are large datasets available, they may exclude under-represented groups,
or small groups might not be represented in patterns extracted by big data techniques, reinforcing
biases [8], [9]. Therefore, small data is increasingly seen as a fruitful and necessary alternative
remedyingthelimitationsofbigdataapproaches[5].
Smalldataproblemsoccurinarangeoffieldsandhence,smalldatamethodologieshavealsobeen
developed across many different research areas (e.g., computer science, mathematics, statistics)
[10]–[12]. Whilethisshowstherelevanceofsmalldataresearchinmanydomains,italsomeansthat
researchmaybeimpededduetoalackofinterdisciplinarycommunication[2],[13]. Inparticular,the
lackofasharedlanguageforsmalldataapproachesacrossdisciplinesisamajorhurdle,inaddition
totechnicalchallengeswhenusingsmalldatamethods,suchasoverfittingandvalidation[14],[15].
To foster such a shared language, this explainer jointly addresses audiences from many different
communitiesdevelopingsmalldatamethods.
Specifically, we aim to raise awareness of, and illustrate, the unique challenges posed by small
data, which originate from limited sample sizes and limited information in the face of complex data
analysis tasks. This is relevant to a range of audiences, including: 1) policymakers and policy
professionals who are interested in understanding how advancements in data science can inform
policy decisions; 2) data scientists familiar with statistical methods, modelling techniques, and ma-
chine learning algorithms, who are interested in understanding small data techniques, challenges,
2
and potential solutions; and 3) computer scientists, mathematicians, and statisticians developing
algorithms,tools,andtechniquesforprocessingandanalysingdata.
Thisexplainerwasguidedbythreeprimaryquestions,answeredthroughextensivedeskreviewand
evidencesynthesis:
1. Whatarethefundamentalprinciplesunderlyingtheconceptofsmalldata,andhowdotheydif-
ferfromthoseofbigdata,particularlyinthecontextoftechnologydevelopmentanddecision-
making?
2. Why has there beena growing interest in leveragingsmall data as analternative approach to
bigdata,andwhataretheoverarchingimplicationsforinclusivetechnologydevelopmentand
decision-makingprocesses?
3. How can various methods and techniques for working with small data be adapted and opti-
mised to address the unique challenges and opportunities present in the context of AI devel-
opmentandpersonalisedapplications?
Toapproachthesequestions,welookatsmalldatafrommultipleperspectives. Section2focuseson
the relevance of both big and small data for policy and decision making, and the core components
of small data applications. We present an overview of big data versus small data and introduce
some limitations of big data that may be addressed by using small data. In particular, we focus on
howbigdatastrugglestorepresentanddealwithextremevaluesinadatadistributionorsubgroups
that might need to be described by their own distribution. This means that under-represented and
minority groups can often become invisible or ignored when the outputs from big data methods
are used to inform decisions, which is especially concerning for high-stakes policy decisions. This
section also includes case study examples of small data use (e.g., rare disease treatment and
wearableassistivetechnology),andintroducesthethemesofsimilarity,transfer,anduncertaintyfor
structuring small data applications and subsequent discussion of specific methods. It is targeted
towardsabroadaudiencewithaspecificfocusonpolicymakers.
In Section 3, also targeted towards a broad audience, we highlight some exemplary application
fields of small data. For some of these, some tailored small data approaches have already been
developed,suchasforrarediseasesettingsorprecisionmedicine,whichcouldserveastemplates
forotherapplicationfields,wheresmalldataapproachesarestilllacking.
InSection4,wedescribesmalldatamethodologiesinmoredetail(e.g.,approachesforincorporating
similarity, foundation models, few-shot learning, meta learning, and the combination of knowledge-
driven and data-driven modelling). Many of these methodologies were developed by different dis-
ciplines and fields, which may potentially hinder awareness and adoption of methods by different
research groups. To address this, we highlight the contributions of different disciplines and explore
potential links. We also present some common challenges in using small data, such as overfit-
ting and validation. This section therefore takes a more technical approach and is tailored for an
interdisciplinarydatascienceaudience.
3
We conclude with some potential opportunities and propose an agenda for increasing the use of
smalldataininSection5.
2 Small data and policy
2.1 The significance of big data for research and decision making
The ability to process vast amounts of information quickly and efficiently has made possible the
identificationofbroadtrends, predictionoffuturebehaviours, andoptimisationofcomplexsystems.
These discoveries and innovations are fuelled by so-called big data. The term big data initially
referredtodatasetssovasttheyrequiredspecialisedcomputingsolutionsforanalysis[16],yetsuch
advanced computing power nowadays is easily available. Despite the name, sheer size is not what
definesbigdata. Insimpleterms,bigdataismoreaccuratelycharacterisedbytheabilitytosearch,
aggregate, and cross-reference extensive datasets, with potential challenges due to a large variety
of data types and data quality issues [8]. However, from a sociotechnical lens, big data rests at the
intersection of 1) technology (maximising the power of computation and algorithms to gather and
analyselargedatasets);2)analysis(identifyingpatternswithinlargedatasetstomakeclaimsabout
processes);and3)mythology(thewidespreadtrustinlargedatasetstoofferthepossibilityoftruth,
objectivityoraccuracypreviouslynotpossible)[17].
The contemporary emphasis on big data began in the early 2000s, coinciding with advancements
in computing power and the large varied quantities of data generated and collected by digital tech-
nologies, including those connected through the internet. Global technology companies began to
harnessbigdatatotransformtheirbusinessmodels,creatinghighlypersonaliseduserexperiences
[18], [19]. The success of these enterprises underscored the value of big data, leading to the
widespreadadoptionofbigdatapracticesacrossvarioussectors,includinghealthcare,financeand
publicpolicy[20].
The corresponding increased awareness of the opportunities of data and focus on gathering data
for better understanding structures and processes has led to significant advancements, regardless
of whether specific applications are big data or not. For example, data availability in healthcare
hasenabledbreakthroughsinprecisionmedicine[21]andpredictivemaintenanceinmanufacturing
[22]. More than this, big data created “a radical shift in how we think about research [...] Big Data
reframes key questions about the constitution of knowledge, the processes of research, how we
shouldengagewithinformation,andthenatureandthecategorizationofreality”[17].
2.2 Limitations of big data and the problem of the ‘average man’
One key limitation of big data approaches is data availability: in many contexts, large datasets are
simply not available, especially in specialised fields like rare diseases (see Box 1 for an exemplary
scenario, and Section 3.1 for more details) or niche markets. Small data approaches, on the other
hand,thriveondetailed,context-specificinformationfromsmallerdatasets,makingtheminvaluable
wheredataisscarce.
4
A clinician specialising in Gaucher disease, a rare genetic disorder that leads to the buildup
of glucocerebroside in various organs [23] due to the deficiency of a specific enzyme, wants
to assess whether a patient is responding well to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). It is
often challenging for the clinician to find the correct dose of ERT, as the disease presents
with diverse manifestations and many different factors need to be considered [24]. In order
to address these issues, the clinician might have access to a clinical registry of patients with
this medical condition, which contains information as to their ERT doses. Despite the likely
small number of observations, which is to be expected for a rare disease registry, a machine
learning approach could be used to deliver dose predictions, ideally leveraging all available
data,leadingtoasmalldatachallenge.
When the clinician has a new patient, for example a 6-year-old child trialling ERT again after
apause,themachinelearningapproachshouldtakeintoaccounthowsimilarthenewpatient
is to the patients already present within the clinical registry. Often, there will be considerable
heterogeneity across patients in a registry, which means that the patients are dissimilar to
each other. Therefore, the new patient might need to be matched to the most similar sub-
group to allow for modelling and prediction based on this subgroup, while still taking some
informationfromtheothersubgroupsintoaccount. Inthiscase,forexample,theremightonly
be a limited subgroup of patients under the age of 10. For these reasons, it can be difficult
tomatchthecurrentpatienttopreviouspatientsinordertomakeaccuratepredictions. When
the new patient cannot be appropriately matched, transfer techniques are required to still en-
ablepredictionmodellingbyatleastusingsomeamountofinformation,e.g.,byextrapolating
acrossagegroups.
Box1: Hypotheticalexemplaryscenariofromthefieldofrarediseasesmalldataapplications.
A second key limitation of big data approaches is the mythology surrounding them, in particular,
the assumption that bigger datasets lead to more reliable conclusions. The belief that ‘bigger is
better’, wheretraditional approachesinbusiness, governance, and technology prioritiselargenum-
bers, goes hand in hand with advancements in computing and AI, which excel at processing vast
amountsofinformationbutoftenfalterwhenconfrontedwithextremevalues(Figure1,PanelA)and
uniquescenarios(Figure1,PanelB).Forinstance,AImodelsforself-drivingcarshaveshowncriti-
calfailureswhenconfrontedwithunexpectedsituations,suchasencounteringabackward-propelled
wheelchair,evenwhentrainedextensivelyonwheelchair-representativedatasets[25].
This highlights how big data approaches, which can be useful for identifying general trends within
large datasets, might obscure the nuances and specificity present in smaller datasets, which might
cover a more diverse range of scenarios. Consequently, individuals and scenarios that do not fit
the majority pattern are marginalised, leading to significant knowledge gaps and inadequately ad-
dressed needs. When these approaches are used for policy decisions, this can lead to ineffective,
inefficientandinequitabledecision-making.
The necessity of considering alternatives to big data approaches becomes even more apparent
5
focus
Dimension 1
2
noisnemiD
(A)
Dimension 1
2
noisnemiD
(B)
limited
consideration
not considered
own distributions
Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of small data challenges with hypothetical data where individuals
aredescribedbytwodimensions,suchaswhenconsideringfactors“age”and“yearsofexperience
withdigitaltechnologies”whendesigningachatbotsystembasedonlargelanguagemodels(LLMs).
(A) Small data conceptualised as the extreme values of a distribution, e.g., a Gaussian distribution,
corresponding to the concept of Quetelet [26]. In this figure, the individuals in the “Focus” area are
within the average, whereas individuals that deviate from this average are considered less often or
notatall. (B)Conceptualisationofsmalldataviasubgroupsofindividualswhichmightbedescribed
by their own distribution, e.g., not treating children as small adults, or analysing the specific needs
ofelderlyusers.
when knowledge of the historical context of statistical methodologies is applied to human popula-
tions and social phenomena. Specifically, the concept of the ‘average man’ was introduced in the
19th century by Belgian astronomer and statistician Adolphe Quetelet FRS. Quetelet’s work laid
the foundation for modern statistics and the field of social physics, which applies statistical meth-
ods to social phenomena. In his pivotal work, Quetelet proposed the idea of the ‘average man’
(‘l’homme moyen’), a hypothetical individual whose characteristics represent the average values of
a population’s various traits. He applied the Gaussian distribution, which had been used primarily
in astronomy and other physical sciences, to human traits. In doing so, he suggested that most
people cluster around a central, average value, with fewer individuals exhibiting extreme values at
themargins.
Quetelet’s concept had profound implications for modern statistics and social science. First, it in-
troduced the idea that human characteristics, such as height, weight, and even behaviours, could
be quantified and analysed statistically. Second, Quetelet asserted that the average value within a
distribution(thel’hommemoyen)shouldbetheprimaryfocuswhenstudyinghumanattributes[26].
This idea laid the groundwork for the development of fields like demography, public health, and so-
cialstatistics. However,italsoledtoanoveremphasisontheaverage,sometimesattheexpenseof
understanding the diversity and complexity of human population, neglecting those who fall outside
thenorm. ThisisillustratedinFigure1,PanelA.
6
Glossary: Foundation models are large-scale machine learning models trained on vast
amounts of diverse data, allowing them to serve as a general-purpose base for a wide range
of downstream tasks. These models, suchas large language models (LLMs) and multimodal
AI systems, acquire broad representations that can be adapted to more specific applications
with limited available data through fine-tuning or in-context learning. These capabilites make
themapowerfultoolforbothbigandsmalldatasettings.
As an alternative conceptualisation, small groups might not be considered as the extreme margins
of a Gaussian distribution, but as having their own, separate distribution (1, Panel B). This implies
theneedtoreasonaboutthesedistributions,whichismadedifficultbylimitedavailabilityofdata. A
solutionistoassesstowhatextentinformationfromthemajoritydistributionorothersubgroupscan
beadapted.
The implications of Quetelet’s work are still evident today with the reliance on averages to use big
data in decision making and policy making. However, it is important to remember that “...people
areindividualpeopleandnotanaverage”[27]. Whileaveragescanprovideusefulsummaries,they
alsomaskimportantvariationsandleadtodecisionsthatdonotadequatelyaddressthenecessities
of all individuals, particularly those with less common traits or needs. This has led to a growing
recognitionoftheimportanceofsmalldataandpersonalisedapproachesthatcancapturetheunique
and diverse experiences of individuals, thereby fostering more inclusive and effective political and
technologicalsolutions,ultimatelybenefitingtheentirepopulation.
An example of this is closed captioning [28], which was initially developed for the deaf and hard of
hearing, however is now widely used in noisy environments like gyms and bars, and by individuals
learningnewlanguagesortryingtofollowalongwithoutsound. Similarly,automaticdoors[29],Text-
to-speech (TTS) and Speech-to-text (STT) systems [30], voice assistants [31] like Amazon’s Alexa
and Apple’s Siri, as well as smartphone accessibility features [32] were also originally designed to
assistdisabledpeoplebuthavedevelopedamuchwiderscopegiventheirconvenienceandeaseof
useinvarioussituations.
2.3 The rise of small data
Inanerawherebigdatadominatesdecision-making,smalldata,whichfocusesondetailed,context-
specificinformationfromsmallerdatasets,offersuniqueandcriticalinsights.
Small data is sometimes referred to as the ‘original data’: early-modern scientific discoveries, from
those of Darwin’s evolutionary theory to Einstein’s fundamental laws, predate big data approaches
and contemporary computational abilities. Humans are also naturally small data learners: given a
single image of a car, children can generalise the concept and recognise similar objects. This is an
impressiveexampleofone-shotlearning,i.e.,learningaclassfromasinglelabelledexample,which
is not straightforward to obtain with classical machine learning approaches [33]. Therefore, it might
7
be attractive to utilise small data ideas also in big data contexts. Certain methodologies already
have integrated small data with big data to transfer information between the big dataset and the
small dataset. For example, foundation models now allow the transfer of information from a huge
body of text, images, or other data to settings with limited data [34] (see Box 2 for an exemplary
scenario).
Consequently,smalldatais(re-)emergingasacrucialcomplementtobigdata,inpartbecauseofits
relevancetoadvancesintechnologieslikeAI.Thisapproachisparticularlyimportantinareaswhere
context-specificinsightsarecritical,suchasinrarediseaseresearch(seeBox1),andpersonalised
marketingstrategies(seeBox3).
Supposeapolicymakerinalargetechcompanyaimstoimprovethesecurityandrobustness
of the company’s software products against cybersecurity threats, e.g., in accordance with a
report recently published by the White House Office of the National Cyber Director [35]. To
achievethis,theyfocusonaddressingknownclassesofvulnerabilitiesthroughuseofsecure
software development practices. The most commonly used programming language for the
company’s products is C++, which is also one of the languages that lacks memory safety
[36]. Inaddition, thepolicymakerknowsthatitiscommonpracticeamongdevelopersintheir
companytouseLLM-basedproductsforassistancewhengeneratingcode. Whilerecentver-
sions of C++ allow for memory-safe programming, the C++ code used to train LLMs is likely
to span several decades, i.e., represent old non-safe practices with potential memory safety
bugs[37]. Thus, thechallenge wouldbeto uselimited amountsofmemory-safe examplesof
codeavailabletogenerateviatheLLMfurthermemory-safecodefortherequestedtask. Ide-
ally,therewouldbeasimilaritymetrictoassessdifferentLLMsanddeterminewhichcanbest
provide this code, in order to select the best solution. Alternatively, LLMs could be fine-tuned
to generate safer code. Users should at least be provided with a warning if the generated
code deviates from the safety standards of the company, or the model might even be able to
morepreciselyindicatehowconfidentitisthatitsoutputisindeedmemory-safe.
Box2: HypotheticalexemplaryscenariofromthefieldofgenerativeAIandfoundationmodels.
8
Suppose a finance tech start up (“FinTech”) is developing an app that helps its users make
informedfinancialdecisionsbyprovidingthempersonalisedrecommendations. Asconsumer
trust is an important factor for the adoption of the product [38], [39], they focus on a strong
adherence to user privacy, in particular, by storing information only on the device of the user,
e.g., a smartphone. In addition, the recommendation algorithm is focused on data minimisa-
tion, by asking the user only for absolutely necessary information and storing only aggregate
data where possible, e.g., only the average proportion of income spent on rent or eating out.
Thislimitstheprivacyimpact,e.g.,incaseofadatabreach.
To enable precise predictions as a basis for recommendations, missing information that is
still required might be extrapolated from similar users, e.g., from a database of users who
agreed to such use of their data. For example, the prediction algorithm might determine
how the individual fits different archetypes, i.e., a student who likes to travel or a married
individual with a stable income and children, using similarity measures. As banks continue
to open up their data to third parties [40], the app should give specific recommendations
on retirement planning by transferring the generic recommendation model onto the specific
spending habits of the user provided by the bank. As financial advice, especially concerning
investments, involves uncertainty, which might be increased by data minimisation, the app
should include uncertainty evaluations to help the individuals make informed decisions about
therisksinvolved,e.g.,whendecidingforasavingstrategy. Theappmightevenindicatewhat
additionalinformationwouldbeneededtoreduceuncertainty.
Box3: Hypotheticalexemplaryscenariofromthefieldof financesandtrustedpersonalisedrecom-
mendations.
The growing interest in small data is also driven by advancements in data collection and analy-
sis technologies that make it easier to gather and interpret more detailed information from smaller
samples. Forexample,wearabledevices,mobilesensors,andspecialisedsoftwareenablethecon-
tinuouscollectionofgranulardata, datathatisverydetailedandspecific, providingarichsourceof
insightsthatwerepreviouslyinaccessible[41](seeBox4).
As another example, mixed-methods research combines quantitative data from large samples with
qualitative insights from smaller groups to provide a more comprehensive understanding of com-
plex phenomena. This integrative approach is particularly valuable in fields like social sciences,
where understanding human behaviour requires analysis of both broad patterns and individual ex-
periences. For a primer on these themes see [42]. Small data techniques are also relevant where
limited,granulardatasetsarecollectedbyindividualresearchersduringday-to-dayexperiments,as
these datasets may be richly diverse, covering a range of heterogeneous scenarios, and relatively
small, so-called long-tail data [6]. Long-tail data is valued for its diversity and specificity, which can
providecriticalinsightsthatlarge,aggregateddatasetsmightoverlook.
Furthermore, small data approaches can help foster innovation and resilience in technologies, as
theyspecificallyacknowledgesubgroups,potentiallyinawiderangeofscenarios,makingthemmore
9
Supposeahealthcareprovideraimstodecreasethenumberofhospitaladmissionsresulting
from recurrent falls among patients. To do this, they give wearable devices with accelerom-
eters to individuals [43]. The detection of falls needs to be performed on the device with
the limited data available there. After a period of time, there is enough accelerometer data
availablefortheindividual,suchashowtheynormallymove,sothatpersonalisationandthus
improvedfalldetectionmightbefeasible. Iftheproviderhasadatabaseofaccelerometerdata
generated from use of this wearable device, the data from the individual could be mapped to
subgroupsofotherindividuals,oralternatively,apredictionmodelcouldbeusedthatisaware
of subgroups and has already been trained on the database. Ideally, this analysis in the con-
textofsimilardatashouldbeperformedwithouttransferringthedataofindividualstoacentral
server,toprotectprivacy.
However, fall detection using accelerometer data is challenging due to significant variability
in how movements are recorded, as well as differences in individual anatomy [44], [45]. This
variability might introduce considerable uncertainty in similarity assessment and predictions.
Therefore, approaches for quantifying uncertainty in all steps are needed. In addition, some
of the patients might not like the wearable device, but want to use the accelerometer on their
phonesinstead[46]. Thismeansthatinformationtransferisrequiredtolinkthisnewdatatype
totheoriginaldatasetsandmodels.
Box4: Hypotheticalexemplaryscenariofromthefieldofassistivetechnologies.
robust in the face of dynamic environments. Thus, personalised and context-specific technology
solutionswillrelyontheutilisationandinclusionofsmalldata.
2.4 Common themes: similarity, transfer, and uncertainty
For making small data challenges manageable, it can be useful to identify sub-tasks that appear in
many small data settings. In the examples given above (in particular Boxes 1-4), there were three
themesthatrepeatedlyemerged: similarity,transfer,anduncertainty. TheseareillustratedinFigure
2, and are briefly introduced in the following. A detailed description of the corresponding technical
approachesisprovidedinSection4.
2.4.1 Similarity
Similarity is relevant when comparing different datasets for potential subsequent integration. In-
tegrating datasets increases the number of observations available for modelling, and involves as-
sessing the similarity of individuals to other individuals or groups of individuals, such as in rare
disease applications, to leverage evidence from similar individuals. In other settings, similarity of
datasetsthatincludeseveralobservationalunitsneedstobeassessed,e.g.,whendecidingwhether
to combine datasets for modelling. As similarity will typically be assessed quantitatively, modelling
techniques that are subsequently used also need to incorporate such quantitative information on
similarity.
10
similarity transfer uncertainty
Dimension 1 Dimension 1 Dimension 1
2
noisnemiD
(A) (B) (C)
2
noisnemiD
2
noisnemiD
Figure2: Illustrationofcommonthemes,namelysimilarity,transfer,anduncertainty,whenaddress-
ing small data challenges. The example uses hypothetical data where individuals are described by
two dimensions, such as when considering factors “age” and “years of experience with digital tech-
nologies” when designing a chatbot system based on LLMs. (A) Assessing the similarity of groups
for potentially incorporating information, e.g., deciding whether to jointly analyse data from children
and older adults when considering inclusive chatbot design. (B) More general information transfer,
whendata/informationcannotbedirectlycombined,e.g.,leveragingchild-centereduserexperience
describedinthescientificliteraturewhendesigningachatbotforolderadults. (C)Quantifyinguncer-
tainty,toassesswhetherthereisenoughdataforobtainingreliableevidence,e.g.,decidingwhether
thereisenoughinformationtoreasonablytailorachatbotforchildren.
When there is already a big dataset or (pre-)trained model, e.g., a foundation model, approaches
for similarity can be useful for assessing whether a dataset at hand is close enough to the typical
settingsrepresentedbythebigdatasetormodeltowarrantuse. Subsequentadaptation,whenthere
issufficientsimilarity,mightthenincludepersonalisationofthemodel,e.g.,byidentifyingsubgroups
representedbythelargemodelthatarethemostsimilartothedatasetathand. Thiscorrespondsto
acknowledgingtheheterogeneityofbigdatasetsandpotentiallyreducingthemintointerlinkedsmall
datasets.
2.4.2 Transfer
The combination of similar datasets already implicitly entails a transfer of information from one
datasettotheother. Yet,weunderstandtransferinabroadersense,relatingnotonlytothetransfer
ofinformationbetweensimilardatasets,butalsotoamoregeneralinformationtransferfromexternal
sources to enrich a small dataset. In particular, information from other sources to be incorporated
can include, e.g., other types of data (other data forms, databases, etc., see Figure 2, Panel B) or
pre-trainedmodels(e.g.,LLMs),reflectingimplicitknowledge,tofacilitatemodellingwithsmalldata
by additional prior knowledge. This requires methods for explicitly transferring information. Use of
methods for transfer ideally should include some quantification of similarity between the different
typesofinformationsourcestoassesswhetherinformationtransferindeedisbeneficial,orwhether
itinsteadisdetrimental,e.g.,whenLLMsoverridetheinformationinthedatasetathandthatisused
11
ascontext.
Insomesettings,knowledgeofthedomainathandmightnotbeavailableinformatsreadyforinfor-
mation transfer, such as mechanistic knowledge or heuristic knowledge of experts. A formalisation
step is then required, before information transfer can be performed. For example, knowledge on
relations between quantities of interest could be expressed in the form of mathematical equations,
even if it is not possible to fully and precisely specify these equations. Methods for information
transferthenneedtoincorporatetheuncertaintyinspecification.
2.4.3 Uncertainty
Due to limited information, uncertainty is a particularly pressing issue to be considered in small
data settings. While uncertainty has been conventionally considered in the context of variability in
parameterestimationinstatisticalmodels,suchaswhenestimatingtreatmenteffects, thetermcan
also be understood in a broader sense. In particular, there are many other kinds of uncertainties,
includinggeneralsourcesofuncertaintyinmodelling,suchasthechoiceofappropriatemodels[47].
Some sources of uncertainty are more specific to small data, particularly uncertainty arising from
quantification of similarity and transfer of information, e.g., in the formalisation of expert knowledge
forinclusionintomodelling.
Where uncertainty cannot be avoided, comprehensive quantification of the different sources of un-
certainty is needed. This enables informed use of the resulting models and predictions. Such
quantification can also enable deliberate acceptance of uncertainty, e.g., when making informed
decisions on data minimisation for a trade-off between uncertainty and privacy (see Box 3 for an
example).
2.5 Implications of small data for evidence-informed policy-making
Thepolicyimplicationsofsmalldataapproachesaresignificant. Duringtimesoffinancialconstraint,
decision-makersoftenrelyondata-supportedstrategiestosetspendingprioritiesandjustifyinvest-
ments in public funds. However, this reliance can marginalise individuals who do not fit within the
majority,suchasthosewithdisabilitiesorexceptionalaccessrequirements[48].
Likewise, dominantbigdataresearchmethodsprioritiselargegroupsandpopulationaverages, po-
tentially disregarding extreme values and reinforcing the ‘invisibility’ of marginalised groups when it
comestodecisionmaking. Forexample, researchintoassistivetechnologiesoftenlacksgeneralis-
ability due to its small, varied sample sizes [49]. Moreover, current big data tools are not designed
tohighlightpatternsortrendsspecifictounderrepresentedgroups,insteadamplifyingtheaverages
andleavingoutcriticalinsightsfromthemargins.
To address these issues, it is essential to recognise that including the margins in research and de-
signprocessescanbenefiteveryone. Movingawayfrombigdataapproachestowardspersonalised
learning and informed, self-aware learners can help create a more equitable and responsive edu-
cational system. Embracing small data and dynamic instability in policymaking can lead to better
12
outcomesforbothindividualsandsocietyasawhole.
3 Exemplary application fields of small data
3.1 Rare diseases and N-of-1 studies
Small data methods are crucial for studying rare diseases, i.e., diseases afflicting less than one in
2,000 persons [50], as this is a prime example for medical conditions with limited data (see Box
1 for a hypothetical example). Correspondingly, this area has produced numerous methodologies
specificallydesignedforsmalldatasets. Still,itisachallengetoadaptmachinelearning,inparticular
deeplearningtechniques,whichtypicallyrequiremoredata[51]. Nevertheless,suchmethodological
developments can be used as a blueprint for other small data settings. It is important to note that
manyofthesetechniquesarenotexplicitlylabelledassmalldatamethods, eventhoughtheyapply
to these scenarios, reflecting the challenge of the lack of shared terminology around small data
methods.
N-of-1studiesareaparticulartypeofsmalldatastudywhichproducedatalimitedbydesign,asthey
focusoncollectingandanalysingdatafromasingleparticipant[52]. Thisisoftenperformedinorder
to determine how effectively the participant responds to a specific intervention, and may involve
the need to combine multiple different types of data from the individual, which requires transfer
methodologies. N-of-1studiesarebettersuitedforchronicconditionsratherthanrapidlyprogressive
diseases, and commonly deployed to assess neurological or musculoskeletal disease [53]. This is
because chronic conditions are often relatively stable or slowly progressive, and require long term
management,whichenablesmultiplecrossoverperiodstoassessefficacyofvarioustreatmentson
thesamepatient.
Smalldatamethodscanassessmedicationefficacy,aswellastheefficacyfromsurgicalprocedures,
behavioural modifications, or medical device assessments [54]. These methodologies can then be
applied to similar study designs where only a single participant is assessed. When aggregating
many N-of-1 studies, the combined data could, e.g., be used for future predictions [55]. Yet, to do
this,onemustassesshowsimilarthedatasetsareanddevelopmethodstocombinedatasetswhen
theyarenotinexactlythesameformat,i.e.,tailoredapproachesareneededforinformationtransfer.
3.2 Precision medicine and case-based reasoning
Personalisation of models, predictions and decisions in small data settings aims to tailor particular
outcomes to the unique characteristics of a single observational unit or a small group. In precision
orpersonalisedmedicine,thisinvolvesadaptingspecifictherapiestosuiteachindividual,accurately
diagnosingdiseases,orpredictingindividualhealthoutcomesbytakingintoaccountuniquegenetic,
lifestyle or environmental factors [48]. Effectively, this means that even a rather large, potentially
multi-modaldatasetmightbereducedtomanysmallsubsetswhenlookingforhomogeneousgroups
ofpatientsthatcouldreceiveapersonalisedprediction. Therefore,muchlikeinrarediseasesettings,
many methodologies developed in the field of precision medicine are useful for small data settings,
13
though they are often not explicitly identified as such. Often, methodologies initially developed for
specific diseases are also applicable to other small data scenarios once researchers recognise
similarunderlyingfeatures.
Oncology has consistently led to advancements in precision medicine, largely because of the ge-
netic basis of many cancers and the rapid progression of genomic technologies, e.g., allowing for
morereliableandaffordablecancerdiagnosis[49],[56]. Theseadvancesenablethecomprehensive
screening of an individual’s genome in just days, facilitating the development of tailored diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic strategies. Big data analysis is effective at identifying patterns across
large datasets, but small data methods are much more adept at tasks such as detecting rare mu-
tations. Small data methodologies can provide assistance, for example, in analysing data from an
individual’sowncellstopredicthowtheywillrespondtotreatment,throughpersonalisedinvivoand
in vitro cancer models [57]. However, this raises many small data challenges, such as looking for
similardatatoincreasethedatasetsize,transferringinformationfromothersources,andassessing
theuncertainty,i.e.,quantifyingthereliabilityofpredictionsfromsuchcancermodels.
The paradigm of case-based reasoning (CBR) considers an extremely personalised setting where
thedatafromthepatientathand,i.e.,asingleobservationalunit,isusedasastartingpointforrea-
soning. CBRthenoffersamodellingmethodologyforusingprevioussimilarexamplesofaproblem
and its solutions, each called a “case”, to offer recommendations for a current similar issue [58].
Thisrecommendationisthenstoredforusewithfuturecases,allowingforiterativelearning[59]. As
for other settings in precision medicine, similarity assessment is therefore crucial in CBR because
theaccuracyofthesolutiondependsontheaccuracyoftheevaluationofsimilaritybetweenthenew
case and stored cases [60]. Furthermore, a machine learning approach must be able to search for
similarcaseseffectivelyandtimeefficiently[58]. Uncertaintyneedstobetakenintoaccount,asthe
available information from previous cases may be incomplete, imprecise, or subjective [61], [62]. It
is also beneficial to develop transfer learning techniques that allow recognition of useful knowledge
fromothersystems,andsupporttheirintegrationintotheCBRmodel[63].
3.3 Assistive technologies, quantified self, and wearable health devices
Therobustpaceofadvancementsinenergy-efficientcomputingandsensorminiaturisation[64]has
enabled wearable devices to become increasingly more capable as assistive technologies. Contin-
uous use of wearable health devices throughout the day can facilitate novel data-driven paradigms
in healthcare and personal health management by providing real-time, comprehensive data from
sensorstoenablepersonalisedmonitoring,e.g.,falldetection(seeBox4),earlydetectionofhealth
issues, and tailored interventions [65]. In particular, this technology has led to a rapidly expanding
“quantifiedself”movement,whereindividualsuseself-trackingtoimprovetheirhealthandwell-being
[66]. Thecorrespondingdata,althoughpotentiallylongitudinallyextensive,issimilartoraredisease
situations, as it pertains to a single individual. In particular, the devices often do not transfer all
recordeddatatocentralisedserversforcombinedanalysiswithdatafromotherindividuals. Instead,
therecordeddataprimarilystayson-deviceandcorrespondinglyanalysisisperformedthere,e.g.,in
14
anedgecomputingsolution[67]. Ifthedeviceatleastintermittentlyhasaccesstoexternalservers,
thesecanbeleveragedforadditionalinformation,e.g.,additionaldataand/ortrainedmodelshosted
by the manufacturer. However, it is still desirable to analyse the small data on-device, and use this
external information as additional context to improve predictions made from the small dataset [68],
asthesepredictionsshouldstillideallybepersonalisedtotheuser. Thismeansthatsomematching
to subgroups represented by the external data is needed, including assessment of similarity and
potentialapproachesforinformationtransfer. Muchlikeabove,thissettingissimilartoraredisease
applications, yet with the additional complication of having the different sources of information in
different locations. On the device itself, the model based on the larger amount of information can
thenbeadaptedtotheuser,toreducethepredictionuncertainty[69].
3.4 Data minimisation
Dataminimisation,i.e.,thecollectingandprocessingofonlythedatarequiredforaspecificpurpose,
is a crucial concept that must be taken into account whenever dealing with data from individuals.
Data minimisation is governed by regulations such as the EU General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR)[70],whichalsounderscoresthenecessityofinformedconsentforcollectingdataandman-
dates that models be designed to provide explanations for their decision-making processes when
required [71]. Small data techniques support data minimisation as they can potentially still achieve
acceptable performance with limited data. This allows for deliberate collection of less data, reduc-
ing unnecessary privacy intrusions (see Box 3 for a hypothetical example). The data of individuals
also might not need to be copied to central servers, e.g., as indicated for applications with wear-
able devices. Together, this lowers the risk of unintended data leaks [72], [73]. This is helpful in a
widerangeofscenarios,frommedicinetofinance,wheredataminimisationshouldbeencouraged.
Minimisation, as enabled by small data methods, might even be beneficial for other reasons, as
collection and analysis of smaller data is often cheaper and can be performed with higher quality
[1]. Yet, deliberate minimisation requires careful assessment of the resulting uncertainty in order to
performaninformedtrade-off. Also,fillinginthegapsleftbydeliberateminimisationbyincorporating
similar data that is already available might require development of targeted techniques for informa-
tiontransfer,ifthereisonlylimitedsimilaritybetweenthedatatobeincorporatedandtheminimised
data.
3.5 Generative AI
LLMs,suchasthatbehindChatGPT,areanexampleoffoundationmodels,thelatestgenerationof
generativeAIapproaches whichprovidegeneralrepresentations learnedfromlarge-scaledatasets
[34]. Correspondingly, they are adaptable for a wide range of creative tasks, such as generating
artwork [74], [75] or music [76], [77], as well as practical tasks such as data augmentation, text
generation, and image synthesis [78]–[80]. They can also be applied to fields such as biology or
medicine [81]–[83]. Once tailored to a specific scenario, such foundation models can be used to
simulate and explore hypothetical situations, even with limited real data available. This ability to
generate synthetic data based on a learned structure, combined with expert insights or established
15
Glossary: In-context learning allows large language models (LLMs), and more generally
foundation models, to perform new tasks without retraining by providing task-specific context
information,e.g.,prompttextthatincludesexamples,aspartoftheinputduringinference. Un-
liketraditionallearningmethodsthatrequireextensivefine-tuning,in-contextlearningenables
LLMs to adapt dynamically to new problems by interpreting the provided context. For exam-
ple,whentaskedwithtranslatingasentenceorgeneratingasummary,themodelcaninferan
appropriate approach based on the information contained in the query itself. This capability
hassignificantimplicationsforrapidprototypingandadaptabilityinreal-worldapplications.
knowledge from a specific field, is particularly attractive in small data settings, as it allows for the
conversionofadditionalknowledgeintodata.
Yetsmalldataproblemsstillarise,asevenlarge-scaledatasetshaveareasthatarehardlycovered,
e.g., asillustratedin2. WhenanLLMisusedtogeneratetextpertainingtoapartoftheunderlying
statistical distribution that is only supported by limited data, it might also have a tendency to hallu-
cinate, which means it fabricates a plausible but incorrect answer [84]. This setting, where the text
used to prompt the LLM corresponds to the small data at hand, while the LLM represents implicit
knowledgefromalarge-scaledataset,isanexampleofamoregeneralclassofsmalldatasettings
where a small dataset is used as context information for in-context learning with foundation mod-
els [85]. Therefore, the challenge is to assess how close the small data at hand is to the implicit
knowledgerepresentedbythefoundationmodeltodetectpotentialissueswithinformationtransfer,
such as hallucination in LLMs. Alternatively, foundation models can be fine-tuned to the small data
at hand by adapting the model parameters. However, this might be challenging with limited data.
Even if such an adaptation is not feasible or straightforward, a model should at least be adapted
to warn the user when the provided response is based on an underrepresented knowledge area.
Theimportanceofacknowledgingandcommunicatingunderlyinguncertaintiesinmodelsshouldbe
considered when formulating policies that rely on predictions or insights from foundation models,
ensuringthereisclearcommunicationfromdevelopersonuncertaintiesandlimitationsinthemodel
predictionsandthatpoliciesaccountforpotentialbiases,gapsinknowledgeandmodellimitations.
4 Methods for working with small data
4.1 Contributions of different disciplines
Small data problems occur in a broad range of diverse application fields, as illustrated by the ex-
amples of small data presented in Box 1-4 and in Section 3. This diversity in applications indicates
an increasing recognition of the need to develop specific small data approaches that can be used
across different disciplines. Currently, since different small data application scenarios are typically
addressed by different disciplines, such as computer science, mathematics, or statistics, there is
high diversity in methodology developed to address small data challenges. This means that small
16
Glossary: Few-shot learning refers to a method in AI where models are trained to perform
tasks using only a small number of labeled examples. This technique is especially useful in
scenarios where gathering extensive labeled datasets is impractical, such as rare medical
conditions or highly specific tasks in industrial applications. By leveraging knowledge from
previouslyseentasksordatasets,few-shotlearningenablesmodelstogeneralizeeffectively,
bridgingthegapbetweendata-richanddata-scarceenvironments.
Glossary: Meta-learning, often referred to as “learning to learn”, trains models to adapt to
new tasks using prior knowledge from multiple datasets. Instead of building a single model
optimized for a specific task, meta learning equips the model with a generalized capability to
handlediverse problems. This approachis particularlyrelevantin smalldata contexts, where
theabilitytoleverageknowledgefromrelateddomainscansignificantlyenhanceperformance.
dataresearchiscurrentlyscatteredacrossdisciplines,impedingtherealisationofitsfullpotential.
A particular challenge is the limited exchange of methods between different data science disci-
plines. For example, mathematics and statistics have been traditionally seen as the disciplines for
small data challenges, as research there has historically been performed in the context of applica-
tions with strong assumptions, which are used to gain mechanistic insight and to compensate for
typically small datasets [1]. Take, for instance, infectious disease modelling, where assumptions
regarding disease transmission and recovery rates are employed to predict the spread of diseases
like influenza or COVID-19 when real-time data is scarce [86]. Similarly, in tumour growth mod-
elling, assumptions about the growth rates and limitations of resources within the tumour are used
toestimatetheprogressionofcancerandoptimisetreatmentswithlimiteddata[87].
Yet,thecomputersciencecommunityhasalsorecentlydevelopedimportantsmalldatatechniques.
These approaches are typically based on AI, and known under labels such as transfer learning,
few-shotlearningormeta-learning,butareonlyslowlyfindingtheirwayintootherdatasciencecom-
munities[88]. Inparticular,manyoftherecentinnovationsingenerativeAIhaveconsiderablepoten-
tial for small data challenges, but are currently scarcely discussed within this context. Conversely,
even though the benefits of incorporating assumptions and domain knowledge into AI approaches
areincreasinglyrecognised(e.g.,[89]–[92]),themodellingexpertiseinthestatisticsandmathemat-
ics community is only slowly being incorporated in current AI approaches developed in computer
science.
Small data applications typically also require strong domain knowledge, but domain experts often
donothaveaccesstostate-of-the-artsmalldatamethods. Eventhoughsuchconnectionsbetween
disciplines are increasingly recognised and needed, it also becomes apparent that they are often
obscured by the lack of a common language [14]. This is particularly relevant with respect to small
data methods, as none of the disciplines have developed a comprehensive small data framework.
17
Clarification and mutual understanding of relevant terminology could remove hurdles and be a first
steptowardssuchasharedframeworkandlanguageacrossdisciplines.
Toachievethis,itisessentialtoreflectonthecontributionsofthedifferentdisciplinestocurrentsmall
datamethods. Firstly,wewillpresentrelevantsmalldataapproachesusedindifferentcommunities,
including corresponding terminology. We begin by giving a brief overview of the contributions of
disciplinesandmethodsdevelopedtheretothesmalldatathemessimilarity,transferanduncertainty
outlined in Section 2.4, before going into more detail on selected specific classes of methods and
approaches.
4.2 Similarity
Quantifying and incorporating similarity into modelling has traditionally been dealt with extensively
inthestatisticscommunity. Forexample,approachesformatching[93]andre-weightingindividuals
[94], [95], allow researchers to make different groups more comparable, or to integrate informa-
tion from other groups when focusing on a specific subgroup [96], [97]. The concept of localised
regression [98] allows researchers to make models, such as regression models, specific to individ-
uals, and can be extended to more flexible nonparametric approaches [99]. Further, approaches
forquantifyingthesimilarityoffittedmodels[100],[101]canbeleveragedforassessingthesimilar-
ity of different groups, e.g., in models for clinical time-to-event data of rather small patient groups
[102], [103]. Dissimilarity of groups of individuals is also considered in meta-analysis techniques,
developed in clinical biostatistics, which allow for the estimation of overall treatment effects across
severalclinicaltrials. Differencesatthedatasetlevelcanalsobetakenintoaccountbyre-calibrating
existing models to local conditions [104]. Methods for taking into account heterogeneity due to dis-
similarityhavealsobeendevelopedforpredictiontasks[105], andtherehavebeensuggestionsfor
quantifyingsimilarityinsuchsettings[106],[107].
Fromacomputerscienceperspective,similaritycanalsobelearnedfromdata,calledmetriclearning
[108]–[111]. Neural networks can also be used for learning a potentially complex mapping into a
latentspacewheresimilaritycanbequantified(e.g.,[112],[113]). Forincorporatingsimilarityatthe
datasetlevel,so-calleddatasetmetafeaturescanbeleveragedinmeta-learningapproaches[114].
4.3 Transfer
Approachesforinformationtransferhavebeenprimarilydrivenbythecomputersciencecommunity
andwillbepresentedinmoredetailinthefollowingsubsections. Suchapproachesincorporatetech-
niquesfortransferringinformationfromtrainedmodelsviapre-trainingandfine-tuningstrategies,or
specificallyinthecontextofLLMs,viatechniquesforretrieval-augmentedgenerationandin-context
learning. More generally, transferring knowledge based on a representation learned from data is
enabledbyapproachesinthefieldofrepresentationlearning. Thisincludestechniquesforfew-shot
learning,whereamodelistrainedtoperformtaskswithverylimitedtrainingexamples.
Another strategy to transfer information is to incorporate explicit knowledge. Corresponding ap-
18
Glossary: Representation learning focuses on transforming raw input data into compact,
meaningful representations that capture the essential features and patterns within the data.
These representations make it easier for downstream tasks, such as classification or cluster-
ing, to identify underlying relationships. Techniques like autoencoder deep neural networks
arecommonlyusedtouncovertheserepresentations,whichareparticularlyvaluableinsmall
data settings. For example, in image recognition, representation learning can distil critical
features like edges and textures into an efficient format, enabling accurate predictions with
limitedtrainingsamples.
Glossary: Neuro-symbolic AI combines the pattern recognition capabilities of neural net-
workswiththestructuredreasoningofsymbolicAI.Thishybridapproachaimstoaddressthe
limitations of purely neural or symbolic systems by integrating data-driven learning with ex-
plicitknowledgerepresentationandreasoning. Neuro-symbolicAIenablessystemstoreason
logicallyabouttheirpredictionswhilehandlingcomplex,unstructureddatalikeimagesortext.
proaches are developed in the field of neuro-symbolic AI for incorporating knowledge, e.g., rep-
resented by mathematical equations or logical systems. More generally, approaches for combin-
ing knowledge-driven and data-driven modelling enable AI-based models to leverage such explicit
knowledge,e.g.,encodedindifferentialequations.
4.4 Uncertainty
The topic of uncertainty is at the core of mathematical and applied statistics, e.g., when providing
uncertainty of estimates in statistical models via confidence intervals. Quantifying uncertainty is
also a crucial aspect of (network) meta-analysis [115]. The need to quantify uncertainty of model
parameters can also be extended to modelling techniques such as differential equations that might
be used for incorporating knowledge [116]. Beyond parameter estimation, the need to quantify
uncertainty more broadly encompasses uncertainty in model prediction, as well as in optimisation
strategy and hyperparameter tuning [117]–[119]. The latter is of particular relevance in AI-based
models, which heavily rely on such hyperparameters to optimise performance. An important class
of approaches for reducing uncertainty by learning across many datasets is provided by ensemble
methodsandspecificallymeta-learning.
4.5 Foundation models
AsintroducedbrieflyinSection2,foundationmodelsandinparticularLLMshaveopenedanewera
of generative AI, as they provide powerful representations adaptable to a wide range of tasks and
applications[34]. Typically,theyhavemanyparameters(billionsorevenhundredsofbillions)andare
first trained on large datasets to learn a general representation. This is referred to as pre-training,
while subsequently adjusting the model to a task-specific, potentially a smaller target dataset of
19
interest, is called fine-tuning. Such a pre-training and fine-tuning strategy is a prototypical example
of information transfer that may be helpful in small data settings, e.g., if a pre-trained model can be
fine-tunedonthesmalltargetdatasetathand.
To avoid the need for large amounts of manually annotated training data, foundation models are
often trained in a self-supervised or weakly supervised fashion [120]. In self-supervised training,
labelled samples are derived from the input data itself, e.g., by predicting a part of the input from
other parts or by reconstructing the original input after random perturbation [121], [122]. Weak
supervision means training on noisy or only partially labelled samples that can be generated in an
automatedway[122].
Foundation models are typically based on a transformer neural network architecture [123]. Trans-
formers have originally been developed for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as sen-
timent classification, text summarization, question answering or translation. They leverage the con-
cept of self-attention to learn the patterns that underlie given input sequences, such as sentences.
Even though their core architecture is not inherently generative, transformers can be adapted to
generative tasks by combining them with additional components such as autoregressive decoding
[124], where the model generates one word at a time conditional on previously generated words.
Alternatively, they can be used within a generative adversarial setup for text generation tasks with
transformersasgeneratoranddiscriminatorcomponents(e.g.,[125]–[128]). Thistechniqueislever-
aged, for example, in the GPT models (generative pre-trained transformer), a series of autoregres-
sivelanguagemodelsthatformthebackboneofChatGPT[129],[130]. Anotherprominentexample
of a language foundation model based on transformers is BERT (bidirectional encoder representa-
tions from transformers) [131], which has also been adapted for other applications, e.g., for protein
structureprediction[132].
The data that can be generated with such models is not limited to text. For example, foundation
models and transformers have found their way into a wide range of data types and applications, in-
cludingimage[133],[134]andaudiodata[76],[77]. Theyhaveevenbeenextendedacrossmultiple
modalities[78]–[80]. Awell-knownexampleareimagegeneratorssuchasDALL-E[74],[75],where
images are generated based on a text prompt entered by the user. Notably, transformer-based
foundation models even enable the generation of tabular data, such as data collected from individ-
uals, e.g., customers, study participants, or patients. For example, prior-data fitted networks [135]
leverage a transformer architecture for training on a large number of synthetic tabular datasets and
subsequently perform inference on a potentially small real-world target dataset without re-training
[135]–[137]. Suchfoundationmodelsforsyntheticdataareparticularlyinterestingfromasmalldata
perspective, as they leverage synthetic data as prior knowledge, which allows the minimization of
trainingdata,inlinewithdataminimisationprinciples.
4.6 Representation learning, in-context learning, and few-shot learning
Many generative AI approaches can be considered a form of representation learning. This means
that they learn to embed the input data into a meaningful representation, which captures its under-
20
lying patterns and structure and allows for generating new data based on the representation. Such
representationlearningiscloselylinkedtotransferlearning,asthelearnedrepresentationallowsre-
searchers to generalise different information sources, as well as datasets, and transfer information
between them. For example, such a representation enables information transfer from the dataset
used for pre-training to a target dataset of interest, or even between different data modalities (e.g.,
inmulti-modalfoundationmodels).
A powerful representation is also a key feature of in-context learning. In-context learning performs
anewtaskbasedonasmallsetofexamplespresentedwithinthecontext(theprompt)atinference
time[85]. ThispropertyisfoundinparticularinLLMs,wheredemonstrationsofthetaskareprovided
to the model as part of the prompt (in natural language). This enables application on novel tasks
without the need for fine-tuning the LLM. Further, it may enable use of LLMs in small data settings,
wherein-contextlearningcanbeusedtotailorthepre-trainedLLMtothesmalldatataskathand.
Another strategy to tailor LLMs to a specific task of interest based on a learned representation is
retrieval-augmented generation. Here, an LLM is linked to an external data source or knowledge
base to include additional information [138]–[140]. This enables information transfer between the
externalknowledgebaseandtheLLMrepresentation,andthuscanalsobeastrategyforleveraging
thepowerofLLMsforsmalldatasettings. Theideaofincludingknowledgeintoadata-drivenmodel
such as an LLM is tightly linked to principles of neuro-symbolic AI and more generally combining
data-drivenandknowledge-drivenmodelling,asexplainedinmoredetailbelow.
Few-shot learning techniques can be employed when a small dataset at hand, comprising only few
observations, has a similar format as the data used for training a large-scale model. Few-shot
learning mimics humans’ ability to learn tasks after having seen only a few samples. The aim is
to leverage the representation obtained from a larger dataset to aid in making predictions for a
smaller target set [108]. Similarly to the setting of in-context learning, a few-shot approach is able
to make predictions for a new task not seen earlier during training by reasoning only from a few
examples(analogoustothecontext)providedduringinference. Inthiscase,thecontextisgivenby
theobservationsofthefew-shottask.
Few-shot learning is an attractive tool for tackling small data challenges, as it aims to optimise
performance when training data is scarce. For example, research in few-shot learning focuses on
how to best extract features from training data, such that the model can learn a feature space
that also covers the subsequent few-shot tasks, i.e., aiming to find an optimal representation for
generalisingtothefew-shottasks. Therepresentationshouldfurtherbestructuredsuchthattraining
on the subsequent task should not lead to forgetting critical structure from previous trainings [141].
In small data situations, few-shot methods also allow for increasing the set of examples used for
training (with data augmentation or generative approaches) or transferring knowledge from prior
learning [142], also across domains. For example, in cross-modal few-shot learning, large-scale
public image databases such as ImageNet [143] are leveraged for the few-shot task of medical
imagediagnosischallenges[144]–[147].
21
4.7 Meta-learning
Meta-learning refers to a set of approaches that allow for sharing information between several (po-
tentially small) datasets. Such information transfer can, e.g., occur via hyperparameters, neural
networkarchitectures,orothermeta-parameters,suchasinitialvaluesofmodelparameters. Meta-
learningapproachesthenaimtotrainamodeljointlyonseveraldatasetssothatitcanbefine-tuned
quickly fornew tasks with fewexamples [148], [149]. Specifically, prior knowledge is extractedfrom
a meta-dataset of several different datasets and/or tasks and subsequently leveraged to fine-tune
on a separate target dataset. This strategy has been particularly successful for joint meta-learning
of prediction models [148], [150]. As several datasets are incorporated at once, typically less fine-
tuningisrequiredonthetargetdataset[151],whichisparticularlyattractivewhenthetargetdataset
issmall.
However, a necessary condition for meta-learning is that source and target datasets are not too
dissimilar. Toaddressthis,meta-learningcanbecombinedwithsimilaritytechniquesforquantifying
andincorporatingthesimilarityofdatasets,e.g.,viadatasetmeta-features,i.e.,characteristicsofthe
target dataset. For example, auxiliary neural networks have been used for generating such dataset
meta-featuresfortabulardatasets[114].
4.8 Knowledge-driven modelling
In many real-world applications, a substantial body of knowledge about the subject at hand may
already be available, e.g., the specialist knowledge of domain experts or knowledge encoded in
rules, systems, or mathematical equations. Knowledge-driven modelling or the incorporation of
suchexistingpriorknowledgeintomodellingmayallowforthereductionoftheamountofextradata
neededandisthusparticularlyattractiveforsmalldatascenarios.
This idea has been at the core of much of the research in statistics and mathematical statistics,
meaning that these disciplines are a key contributor to small data methodologies [1]. There has
been a recent surge in research in these disciplines, for infusing this broad small data expertise
into settings where big data techniques need to be adapted to small data settings. This is com-
plemented by developments in computer science, where ideas of knowledge driven-modelling are,
e.g., reflected in neuro-symbolic AI. This approach combines data-driven modelling by neural net-
works with symbolic AI techniques, which rely on a symbolic representation of explicit knowledge
and logical reasoning, e.g., leveraging expert systems, rule-based systems designed to mimic the
decision-making capabilities of a human domain expert, logic programming, semantic web tech-
niques,orplanningandschedulingsystems[152]–[154].
In contrast to neural networks, which are powerful for learning complex patterns from data but are
inherently opaque and difficult to interpret, such symbolic AI techniques can provide greater trans-
parency, explainability, and verifiability and therefore increase trustworthiness. Neuro-symbolic AI
aims to integrate these two paradigms and combine their respective strengths to provide hybrid
toolsthatintegratereasoningandlearningfromdatainanefficientandtransparentway[154],[155].
22
Thus,theycanprovidemoreexplainableAIapproachesandallowforincorporatingpriorknowledge
into learning [155]. These properties may be particularly desirable in sensitive applications where
explainabilityisespeciallyimportant,suchasinprecisionmedicine,orforpolicymakingingeneral.
As indicated, knowledge-driven modelling is a dominant paradigm in statistics and many areas
of mathematics and physics. Here, research often builds on a strong body of prior knowledge,
which is typically reflected in strong modelling assumptions, e.g., in statistics, when pre-specifying
the structure of a regression model for assessing treatment effects in a clinical trial. Similarly,
in physics or systems biology, temporal dynamics are typically modelled by differential equations
that are defined based on domain knowledge, e.g., about the relevant interactions and regulatory
processes to describe a small set of molecular or cellular quantities [156]. For building on such
knowledge-drivenmodellingtools,whileallowingforadditionalflexibility,theycanbecombinedwith
flexible, general-purpose data-driven modelling techniques that require less specific domain knowl-
edge [157], promising tools that are more data-efficient, and at the same time more interpretable.
For example, neural differential equations [158], [159] integrate mechanistic knowledge into neu-
ral networks by combining them with differential equations, thus directly combining data-driven and
knowledge-driven modelling. More generally, neural networks can be used as components to re-
place parts of a mechanistic model, such as a system of differential equation systems that cannot
be fully specified [160], [161]. From a technical perspective, such approaches are often based
on the paradigm of differentiable programming, which generally allows the integration of modelling
componentsfromdifferentcommunities,e.g.,machinelearningandscientificcomputing[162].
When knowledge on a subject of interest is specific enough that it can be phrased in terms of a
prior distribution for a parameter in a model, statistical modelling provides a rich set of Bayesian
techniques for model building and evaluation [163]. Yet, when such a precise specification is not
feasible,butknowledgestillisavailableintheformofmodels,thereareotherwaysforincorporating
suchknowledge,e.g.,byaugmentingtheoriginaldatawithdatafromthemodel,post-filtering[164],
domain adaptation [165], or regularization [166]. Pre-existing knowledge can also be incorporated
based on expert input in the form of probabilistic relationships of variables [167]. Approaches for
incorporating knowledge into machine learning have been more generally investigated and cate-
gorisedunderthelabel“informedmachinelearning”[168],alsowithspecificdevelopmentsforother
applicationdomains,suchasphysics[169].
4.9 General challenges
4.9.1 Overfitting
Training models on limited data incurs the risk of overfitting, i.e., when the model has learned char-
acteristicsuniquetothelimitedtrainingdataandisalignedtoocloselytoit,butdoesnotgeneralise
to other datasets. While overfitting can also occur in large datasets, small data settings are partic-
ularly prone to it due to the limited information available. With fewer data points, there may not be
enoughdiversitytocoverawiderangeofsituations,makingitmorelikelythatthemodelwillpickup
noiseorspecificpatternsthatdonotgeneralise[170,p. 108–114].
23
Arelatedproblemcanoccurwhentheobservationsfallintoseveralcategories,andsomecategories
are represented more often than others. For example, in a longitudinal clinical dataset on a severe
chronic disease, there might be more patients with comorbidities than without, i.e., the presence of
comorbidities is overrepresented. The model is then biased towards predicting the more prevalent
class, leadingtooverrepresentation, ormayfailtopredicttheminorityclass, leadingtounderrepre-
sentation[171]. Insmalldatasettings,theremaysimplynotbeenoughdatapointswithinasingular
classinordertoproperlyassessit.
When models are based on historical data, that is, data that was collected in the past, there is no
guarantee that this data will remain in this form over time, or is the same in other datasets [172].
Potentiallynecessaryadaptationcouldagainbebasedonapproachesforsimilarityandtransfer.
4.9.2 Validation
Whendevelopingamodelonaspecificdatasetofinterest,thedataistypicallysplitintoadatasetfor
training the model and a second dataset for testing the model [173]. Sometimes, when training the
model,datafromthetestdatasetisaccidentallyusedduringthetrainingprocess. Thisphenomenon
is known as data leakage. While this is an issue for both big data and small data, it tends to
have more pronounced and unpredictable effects on small datasets compared to larger ones [174].
Becausethedatasetsaresosmall,thiscanleadtoanoverestimationofmodelaccuracy,adecrease
initsabilitytogeneralisetonewdata(knownasgeneralisability),andtheintroductionofbias.
After internal validation, models need to go through external validation to see whether the results
are generalisable to other, similar datasets [175]. In a small data scenario, this might be rather
challenging to realise if there is no sufficient external data available, or if only dissimilar data is
available. Assessmentandincorporationofsimilarityisthereforecrucial. Toremovehurdles,policies
should facilitate streamlined data exchange and recommend the creation of data in accordance
withtheFAIR(Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable)principles[176]toenablejointuseof
similardatasetsforvalidation,oralreadyformodeldevelopment.
5 Conclusions and future perspectives
In an increasingly data-centric world, it is important to make full use of new technologies, such as
AI techniques. As shown, the potential benefits are not limited to big data settings, but in particular
small data settings can benefit and also need more attention, e.g., to adequately serve underrep-
resented groups. Novel data analysis and modelling techniques for small data settings can then
complementtechnicaldevelopments,suchasinassistivetechnologies,torealisetheirfullpotential.
We have provided a variety of case studies and application settings not only to highlight the broad
applicability of small data solutions, but also to show the potential from areas where small data
techniques are more established, e.g., for rare diseases, to those where the potential is apparent
buttechniquesstillneedtobeestablished.
24
However, a wide range of applications, each with contributions from many stakeholders and aca-
demic disciplines, runs the risk of confusing newcomers and reinventing the wheel. To enable
sufficient communication across disciplines, a shared language is needed as a first step towards
a joint small data framework. This motivated us to jointly present ideas from different disciplines,
such as the ‘average man’ from the social sciences, transfer learning from computer science, and
thequantificationofsimilarityanduncertaintyfromstatisticsandmathematics.
As the common themes of similarity, transfer, and uncertainty may be more generally useful for
structuringthefieldofsmalldatamethods,wehaveprovidedanoverviewofhowthesethemesare
approached by the different disciplines, including links between them. Hopefully, this will stimulate
thefusionofknowledge-drivenapproaches,astraditionallyusedinstatisticsandmathematics,and
data-drivenapproaches,asnowprominentlyestablishedwithdeeplearningtechniquesincomputer
science. Such a fusion could be the key to unlocking AI techniques for small data settings. As
method development in different disciplines is currently rather siloed, further investment may be
warranted to gain commitment from different disciplines and allow for the development of common
methods,aswellasanalysisofbarrierstointerdisciplinarysmalldataresearch.
As an example of a specific technique that could be considered a starting point for such endeav-
ours,foundationmodels,suchasLLMs,appeartobeaparticularlypromisingapproachforbringing
additionalinformationtosmalldatasets. Asdescribed,thereiscurrentlyavibrantcommunitydevel-
opingfoundationmodelsfordifferentfields,andtraining/fine-tuningapproachesthatcanincorporate
many different types of data and models. This flexibility could also offer an avenue for contributions
fromdifferentdisciplines, wheredisciplines focusedonknowledge-drivenapproachescould, forex-
ample, provide knowledge in the form of synthetic data that can then be ingested by data-driven
approaches. Ofcourse,thiswillalsodependonestablishingasharedlanguageandaforumwhere
differentdisciplinescandevelopacommonunderstandinginordertomakethebestuseofdifferent
expertise.
Developments in the methods community must be accompanied by a strong push to expand its
application across more fields. So far, many assume that fields which cannot offer big data are cut
off from novel methods, such as AI. Therefore, it is of prime importance to raise awareness for the
opportunities of small data. One way this could be achieved is through dedicated initiatives that
bring together all stakeholders. This would also be critical for ensuring feedback from the specific
application fields into the broader methodological community, for steering the small data field in the
rightdirection,andforrealisingthefullpotentialofsmalldataineverydaylife.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-
dation) – Project-ID 499552394 – SFB 1597. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Royal
Society,whichcontributedtothesuccessfulcompletionofthisresearchaspartofthedevelopment
oftheDisabilityTechnologyreport.
25
References
[1] J. J. Faraway and N. H. Augustin, “When small data beats big data,” Statistics & Probability
Letters,vol.136,pp.142–145,2018.
[2] H. Chahal, H. Toner, and I. Rahkovsky, “Small data’s big AI potential,” Center for Security
andEmergingTechnology,2021.
[3] S.Ehrenberg-Silies,“Beyondbigdata,”BürofürTechnikfolgen-AbschätzungbeimDeutschen
Bundestag(TAB),2019.
[4] E. Strickland, “Andrew Ng, AI minimalist: The machine-learning pioneer says small is the
newbig,”IEEESpectrum,vol.59,no.4,pp.22–50,2022.
[5] I. H. Rather, S. Kumar, and A. H. Gandomi, “Breaking the data barrier: A review of deep
learning techniques for democratizing AI with small datasets,” Artificial Intelligence Review,
vol.57,no.9,p.226,2024.
[6] A. R. Ferguson, J. L. Nielson, M. H. Cragin, A. E. Bandrowski, and M. E. Martone, “Big
data from small data: Data-sharing in the ‘long tail’ of neuroscience,” Nature Neuroscience,
vol.17,no.11,pp.1442–1447,2014.
[7] E. B. Hekler, P. Klasnja, G. Chevance, N. M. Golaszewski, D. Lewis, and I. Sim, “Why we
needasmalldataparadigm,”BMCMedicine,vol.17,pp.1–9,2019.
[8] S. Shilo, H. Rossman, and E. Segal, “Axes of a revolution: Challenges and promises of big
datainhealthcare,”NatureMedicine,vol.26,no.1,pp.29–38,2020.
[9] S.Leonelli,“Data—fromobjectstoassets,”Nature,vol.574,no.7778,pp.317–320,2019.
[10] Z. Li, H. Yao, and F. Ma, “Learning with small data,” in International Conference on Web
SearchandDataMining,2020,pp.884–887.
[11] T.ShaikhinaandN.A.Khovanova,“Handlinglimiteddatasetswithneuralnetworksinmedical
applications: A small-data approach,” Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 75, pp. 51–63,
2017.
[12] B.Dou,Z.Zhu,E.Merkurjev, L.Ke,L.Chen,J.Jiang, etal.,“Machinelearningmethods for
small data challenges in molecular science,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 123, no. 13, pp. 8736–
8780,2023.
[13] P.Kokol,M.Kokol,andS.Zagoranski,“Machinelearningonsmallsizesamples:Asynthetic
knowledgesynthesis,”ScienceProgress,vol.105,no.1,2022.
[14] L. Faes, D. A. Sim, M. van Smeden, U. Held, P. M. Bossuyt, and L. M. Bachmann, “Artificial
intelligence and statistics: Just the old wine in new wineskins?” Frontiers in Digital Health,
vol.4,p.833912,2022.
[15] J. Bornschein, F. Visin, and S. Osindero, “Small data, big decisions: Model selection in the
small-dataregime,”2020.arXiv:2009.12583,pre-published.
[16] L. Manovich, “Trending: The promises and the challenges of big social data,” in Debates in
theDigitalHumanities,UniversityofMinnesotaPress,2012,pp.460–475.
26
[17] D.BoydandK.Crawford,“Criticalquestionsforbigdata:Provocationsforacultural,techno-
logical,andscholarlyphenomenon,”Information,CommunicationandSociety,vol.15,no.5,
pp.662–679,2012.
[18] V. Mayer-Schönberger and K. Cukier, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We
Live,WorkandThink.London:Murray,2013,242pp.
[19] T. H. Davenport and J. Dyché, “Big data in big companies,” International Institute for Analyt-
ics,2013.[Online].Available:https://www.iqpc.com/media/7863/11710.pdf.
[20] M. Hillyer. “Here’s how technology has changed the world since 2000,” World Economic
Forum.(2020),[Online].Available:https://www.weforum.org/stories/2020/11/heres-
how-technology-has-changed-and-changed-us-over-the-past-20-years/.
[21] E.A.Ashley,“Towardsprecisionmedicine,”NatureReviewsGenetics,vol.17,no.9,pp.507–
522,2016.
[22] J. Lee, E. Lapira, B. Bagheri, and H.-a. Kao, “Recent advances and trends in predictive
manufacturingsystemsinbigdataenvironment,”ManufacturingLetters,vol.1,no.1,pp.38–
41,2013.
[23] J.Stirnemann,N.Belmatoug,F.Camou,C.Serratrice,R.Froissart,C.Caillaud,etal.,“Are-
viewofGaucherdiseasepathophysiology,clinicalpresentationandtreatments,”International
JournalofMolecularSciences,vol.18,no.2,p.441,2017.
[24] H.C.Andersson,J.Charrow,P.Kaplan,P.Mistry,G.M.Pastores,A.Prakesh-Cheng,etal.,
“Individualization of long-term enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher disease,” Genetics
inMedicine,vol.7,no.2,pp.105–110,2005.
[25] J. Treviranus, “The value of being different,” in International Web for All Conference, 2019,
pp.1–7.
[26] D. Tafreshi, “Adolphe Quetelet and the legacy of the “average man” in psychology.,” History
ofPsychology,vol.25,no.1,p.34,2022.
[27] G. Marsden, A. Maunder, and M. Parker, “People are people, but technology is not technol-
ogy,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-
neeringSciences,vol.366,no.1881,pp.3795–3804,2008.
[28] G. J. Downey, Closed Captioning: Subtitling, Stenography, and the Digital Convergence of
TextwithTelevision.Baltimore:JohnsHopkinsUniversityPress,2008,387pp.
[29] E.SteinfeldandJ.Maisel,UniversalDesign:CreatingInclusiveEnvironments.Hoboken,NJ:
JohnWiley&Sons,Inc,2012,382pp.
[30] WebAccessibility:AFoundationforResearch.SpringerLondon,2019.
[31] A. Pradhan, K. Mehta, and L. Findlater, ““Accessibility came by accident”: Use of voice-
controlledintelligentpersonalassistantsbypeoplewithdisabilities,”inConferenceonHuman
FactorsinComputingSystems,AssociationforComputingMachinery,2018,pp.1–13.
[32] K.EllisandG.Goggin,“Disability,locativemedia,andcomplexubiquity,”inUbiquitousCom-
puting,ComplexityandCulture,Routledge,2015,pp.272–287.
27
[33] O.Vinyals,C.Blundell,T.Lillicrap,K.Kavukcuoglu,andD.Wierstra,“Matchingnetworksfor
one shot learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016. [Online].
Available:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2016/hash/90e1357
833654983612fb05e3ec9148c-Abstract.html.
[34] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx, et al., “On the
opportunitiesandrisksoffoundationmodels,”2022.arXiv:2108.07258,pre-published.
[35] “Back to the building blocks: A path toward secure and measurable software,” White House
OfficeoftheNationalCyberDirector,2024.[Online].Available:https://bidenwhitehouse
.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Final-ONCD-Technical-Report.pdf.
[36] Department of Homeland Security, “The case for memory safety roadmaps,” Cybersecurity
Infrastructure andSecurity Agency, 2023.[Online]. Available: https://www.cisa.gov/sit
es/default/files/2023-12/The-Case-for-Memory-Safe-Roadmaps-508c.pdf.
[37] R. Khoury, A. R. Avila, J. Brunelle, and B. M. Camara, “How secure is code generated by
ChatGPT?,”2023.arXiv:2304.09655,pre-published.
[38] H. Stewart and J. Jürjens, “Data security and consumer trust in FinTech innovation in ger-
many,”Information&ComputerSecurity,vol.26,no.1,pp.109–128,2018.
[39] A. Torno, D. R. Metzler, and V. Torno, “Robo-what?, robo-why?, robo-how? – a systematic
literaturereviewofrobo-advice,”PacificAsiaConferenceonInformationSystems,2021.[On-
line].Available:https://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2021/92.
[40] L. Wewege, J. Lee, and M. C. Thomsett, “Disruptions and digital banking trends,” Journal of
AppliedFinance&Banking,vol.10,no.6,pp.1–2,2020.[Online].Available:https://idea
s.repec.org//a/spt/apfiba/v10y2020i6f10_6_2.html.
[41] L. Piwek, D. A. Ellis, S. Andrews, and A. Joinson, “The rise of consumer health wearables:
Promisesandbarriers,”PLoSmedicine,vol.13,no.2,2016.
[42] HandbookofMixedMethodsinSocialandBehavioralResearch.ThousandOaks,California:
SAGEPublications,2003.
[43] A.RamachandranandA.Karuppiah,“Asurveyonrecentadvancesinwearablefalldetection
systems,”BioMedResearchInternational,vol.2020,pp.1–17,2020.
[44] R.Igual,C.Medrano,andI.Plaza,“Challenges,issuesandtrendsinfalldetectionsystems,”
BioMedicalEngineeringOnLine,vol.12,no.1,p.66,2013.
[45] C.Medrano,I.Plaza,R.Igual,A.Sánchez,andM.Castro,“Theeffectofpersonalizationon
smartphone-basedfalldetectors,”Sensors,vol.16,no.1,p.117,2016.
[46] L.Martínez-Villaseñor,H.Ponce,J.Brieva,E.Moya-Albor,J.Núñez-Martínez,andC.Peñafort-
Asturiano,“UP-Falldetectiondataset:Amultimodalapproach,”Sensors,vol.19,no.9,p.1988,
2019.
[47] E.HüllermeierandW.Waegeman,“Aleatoricandepistemicuncertaintyinmachinelearning:
An introduction to concepts and methods,” Machine Learning, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 457–506,
2021.
28
[48] National Research Council (US), Toward Precision Medicine: Building a Knowledge Net-
workforBiomedicalResearchandaNewTaxonomyofDisease.Washington(DC):National
Academies Press (US), 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books
/NBK91503/.
[49] F.Ciardiello,D.Arnold,P.G.Casali,A.Cervantes,J.-Y.Douillard,A.Eggermont,etal.,“De-
liveringprecisionmedicineinoncologytodayandinfuture—thepromiseandchallengesof
personalised cancer medicine: A position paper by the european society for medical oncol-
ogy(ESMO),”AnnalsofOncology,vol.25,no.9,pp.1673–1678,2014.
[50] I.Villalón-García,M.Álvarez-Córdoba,J.M.Suárez-Rivero,S.Povea-Cabello,M.Talaverón-
Rey,A.Suárez-Carrillo,etal.,“Precisionmedicineinrarediseases,”Diseases,vol.8,no.4,
p.42,2020.
[51] J. Banerjee, J. N. Taroni, R. J. Allaway, D. V. Prasad, J. Guinney, and C. Greene, “Machine
learninginraredisease,”NatureMethods,vol.20,no.6,pp.803–814,2023.
[52] S. McDonald, F. Quinn, R. Vieira, N. O’Brien, M. White, D. W. Johnston, et al., “The state of
the art and future opportunities for using longitudinal n-of-1 methods in health behaviour re-
search:Asystematicliteratureoverview,”HealthPsychologyReview,vol.11,no.4,pp.307–
323,2017.
[53] R. Mirza, S. Punja, S. Vohra, and G. Guyatt, “The history and development of n-of-1 trials,”
JournaloftheRoyalSocietyofMedicine,vol.110,no.8,pp.330–340,2017.
[54] N. B. Gabler, N. Duan, S. Vohra, and R. L. Kravitz, “N-of-1 trials in the medical literature: A
systematicreview,”MedicalCare,vol.49,no.8,pp.761–768,2011.
[55] D. R. Zucker, R. Ruthazer, and C. H. Schmid, “Individual (n-of-1) trials can be combined to
givepopulationcomparativetreatmenteffectestimates:Methodologicconsiderations,”Jour-
nalofClinicalEpidemiology,vol.63,no.12,pp.1312–1323,2010.
[56] K. T. Schmidt, C. H. Chau, D. K. Price, and W. D. Figg, “Precision oncology medicine: The
clinical relevance of patient-specific biomarkers used to optimize cancer treatment,” The
JournalofClinicalPharmacology,vol.56,no.12,pp.1484–1499,2016.
[57] M. J. Walker, J. Bourke, and K. Hutchison, “Evidence for personalised medicine: Mecha-
nisms,correlation,andnew kindsofblackbox,”TheoreticalMedicineandBioethics,vol.40,
pp.103–121,2019.
[58] A.AamodtandE.Plaza,“Case-basedreasoning:Foundationalissues,methodologicalvari-
ations,andsystemapproaches,”AICommunications,vol.7,no.1,pp.39–59,1994.
[59] C.Dussart,P.Pommier,V.Siranyan,G.Grelaud,andS.Dussart,“Optimizingclinicalpractice
with case-based reasoning approach,” Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, vol. 14,
no.5,pp.718–720,2008.
[60] T. W. Liao, Z. Zhang, and C. R. Mount, “Similarity measures for retrieval in case-based rea-
soningsystems,”AppliedArtificialIntelligence,vol.12,no.4,pp.267–288,1998.
29
[61] R. Weber, “Fuzzy set theory and uncertainty in case-based reasoning,” Engineering Intelli-
gentSystemsforElectricalEngineeringandCommunications,vol.14,no.3,p.121,2007.
[62] N. Löw, J. Hesser, and M. Blessing, “Multiple retrieval case-based reasoning for incomplete
datasets,”JournalofBiomedicalInformatics,vol.92,p.103127,2019.
[63] D. W. Aha, M. Molineaux, and G. Sukthankar, “Case-based reasoning in transfer learning,”
inCase-BasedReasoningResearchandDevelopment,Springer,2009,pp.29–44.
[64] A.Tricoli,N.Nasiri,andS.De,“Wearableandminiaturizedsensortechnologiesforpersonal-
ized and preventive medicine,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 27, no. 15, p. 1605271,
2017.
[65] L.Lu,J.Zhang,Y.Xie,F.Gao,S.Xu,X.Wu,etal.,“Wearablehealthdevicesinhealthcare:
Narrativesystematicreview,”JMIRmHealthanduHealth,vol.8,no.11,e18907,2020.
[66] S. Feng, M. ki, A. Dhir, and H. Salmela, “How self-tracking and the quantified self promote
health and well-being: Systematic review,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 23,
no.9,e25171,2021.
[67] E. Covi, E. Donati, X. Liang, D. Kappel, H. Heidari, M. Payvand, et al., “Adaptive extreme
edgecomputingforwearabledevices,”FrontiersinNeuroscience,vol.15,2021.
[68] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. M. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen, “Convergence of edge
computing and deep learning: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials,vol.22,no.2,pp.869–904,2020.
[69] A.Ferrari,D.Micucci,M.Mobilio,andP.Napoletano,“Deeplearningandmodelpersonaliza-
tioninsensor-basedhumanactivityrecognition,”JournalofReliableIntelligentEnvironments,
vol.9,no.1,pp.27–39,2023.
[70] European Parliament, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing
of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC
(GeneralDataProtectionRegulation),2016.[Online].Available:https://eur-lex.europa
.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32016R0679.
[71] J. Dexe, U. Franke, K. Söderlund, N. van Berkel, R. H. Jensen, N. Lepinkäinen, et al., “Ex-
plaining automated decision-making: A multinational study of the GDPR right to meaningful
information,”TheGenevaPapersonRiskandInsurance-IssuesandPractice,vol.47,no.3,
pp.669–697,2022.
[72] I. Sanchez-Rola, M. Dell’Amico, P. Kotzias, D. Balzarotti, L. Bilge, P.-A. Vervier, et al., “Can
I opt out yet?: GDPR and the global illusion of cookie control,” in ACM Asia Conference on
ComputerandCommunicationsSecurity,2019,pp.340–351.
[73] M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel, “Private traits and attributes are predictable from
digitalrecordsofhumanbehavior,”NationalAcademyofSciences,vol.110,no.15,pp.5802–
5805,2013.
30
[74] A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, et al., “Zero-shot text-to-
imagegeneration,”inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,2021,pp.8821–8831.
[Online].Available:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/ramesh21a.html.
[75] A.Ramesh,P.Dhariwal,A.Nichol,C.Chu,andM.Chen,“Hierarchicaltext-conditionalimage
generationwithCLIPlatents,”2022.arXiv:2204.06125,pre-published.
[76] Y.-S.HuangandY.-H.Yang,“Popmusictransformer:Beat-basedmodelingandgenerationof
expressive pop piano compositions,” in ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2020,
pp.1180–1188.
[77] D. Yang, J. Tian, X. Tan, R. Huang, S. Liu, X. Chang, et al., “UniAudio: An audio foundation
modeltowarduniversalaudiogeneration,”2024.arXiv:2310.00704,pre-published.
[78] C.Wu,S.Yin,W.Qi,X.Wang,Z.Tang,andN.Duan,“VisualChatGPT:Talking,drawingand
editingwithvisualfoundationmodels,”2023.arXiv:2303.04671,pre-published.
[79] H. Xu, Q. Ye, M. Yan, Y. Shi, J. Ye, Y. Xu, et al., “mPLUG-2: A modularized multi-modal
foundation model across text, image and video,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2023, pp. 38728–38748. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press
/v202/xu23s.html.
[80] H.-K. Ko, G. Park, H. Jeon, J. Jo, J. Kim, and J. Seo, “Large-scale text-to-image genera-
tion models for visual artists’creative works,” in International Conference on IntelligentUser
Interfaces,2023,pp.919–933.
[81] W.HouandZ.Ji,“AssessingGPT-4forcelltypeannotationinsingle-cellRNA-seqanalysis,”
NatureMethods,pp.1–4,2024.
[82] D.Peng,L.Zheng,D.Liu,C.Han,X.Wang,Y.Yang,etal.,“Large-languagemodelsfacilitate
discoveryofthemolecularsignaturesregulatingsleepandactivity,”NatureCommunications,
vol.15,no.1,p.3685,2024.
[83] J. Chang and J. C. Ye, “Bidirectional generation of structure and properties through a single
molecularfoundationmodel,”NatureCommunications,vol.15,no.1,p.2323,2024.
[84] N. McKenna, T. Li, L. Cheng, M. J. Hosseini, M. Johnson, and M. Steedman, “Sources of
hallucination by large language models on inference tasks,” 2023. arXiv: 2305.14552, pre-
published.
[85] T.B.Brown,B.Mann,N.Ryder,M.Subbiah,J.Kaplan,P.Dhariwal,etal.,“Languagemodels
arefew-shotlearners,”2020.arXiv:2005.14165,pre-published.
[86] C. J. E. Metcalf and J. Lessler, “Opportunities and challenges in modeling emerging infec-
tiousdiseases,”Science,vol.357,no.6347,pp.149–152,2017.
[87] T. Alarcón, H. M. Byrne, and P. K. Maini, “A cellular automaton model for tumour growth in
inhomogeneous environment,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, vol. 225, no. 2, pp. 257–274,
2003.
31
[88] S. Friedrich, G. Antes, S. Behr, H. Binder, W. Brannath, F. Dumpert, et al., “Is there a role
for statistics in artificial intelligence?” Advances in Data Analysis and Classification, vol. 16,
pp.823–846,2022.
[89] J. N. Kather, N. Ghaffari Laleh, S. Foersch, and D. Truhn, “Medical domain knowledge in
domain-agnosticgenerativeAI,”npjDigitalMedicine,vol.5,no.1,pp.1–5,2022.
[90] T. Dash, S. Chitlangia, A. Ahuja, and A. Srinivasan, “A review of some techniques for in-
clusion of domain-knowledge into deep neural networks,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1,
p.1040,2022.
[91] J.Nie,J.Jiang,Y.Li,H.Wang,S.Ercisli,andL.Lv,“Dataanddomainknowledgedual-driven
artificial intelligence: Survey, applications, and challenges,” Expert Systems, vol. 42, no. 1,
e13425,2025.
[92] J.C.M.Darwin,G.Mendel,R.Franklin,J.Watson,etal.,“Poolingthestrengthsofdataand
models,”NatureBiomedicalEngineering,vol.5,no.4,pp.291–292,2021.
[93] P.C.Austin,“Theperformanceofdifferentpropensityscoremethodsforestimatingmarginal
oddsratios,”StatisticsinMedicine,vol.26,no.16,pp.3078–3094,2007.
[94] P.C.AustinandE.A.Stuart,“Movingtowardsbestpracticewhenusinginverseprobabilityof
treatment weighting (IPTW) using the propensity score to estimate causal treatment effects
inobservationalstudies,”StatisticsinMedicine,vol.34,no.28,pp.3661–3679,2015.
[95] O.Borgan,L.Goldstein,andB.Langholz,“Methodsfortheanalysisofsampledcohortdata
in the cox proportional hazards model,” Annals of Statistics, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1749–1778,
1995.
[96] V. Weyer and H. Binder, “A weighting approach for judging the effect of patient strata on
high-dimensionalriskpredictionsignatures,”BMCBioinformatics,vol.16,p.294,2015.
[97] J. Richter, K. Madjar, and J. Rahnenführer, “Model-based optimization of subgroup weights
forsurvivalanalysis,”Bioinformatics,vol.35,no.14,pp.i484–i491,2019.
[98] C.Loader,LocalRegressionandLikelihood.NewYork,NY:SpringerNewYork,1999,290pp.
[99] R.J.Samworth,“Optimalweightednearestneighbourclassifiers,”AnnalsofStatistics,vol.40,
no.5,pp.2733–2763,2012.
[100] W. Liu, F. Bretz, A. J. Hayter, and H. P. Wynn, “Assessing nonsuperiority, noninferiority, or
equivalencewhencomparingtworegressionmodelsoverarestrictedcovariateregion,”Bio-
metrics,vol.65,no.4,pp.1279–1287,2009.
[101] H.Dette,K.Möllenhoff,S.Volgushev,andF.Bretz,“Equivalenceofregressioncurves,”Jour-
naloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation,vol.113,no.522,pp.711–729,2018.
[102] N. Binder, K. Möllenhoff, A. Sigle, and H. Dette, “Similarity of competing risks models with
constantintensitiesinanapplicationtoclinicalhealthcarepathwaysinvolvingprostatecancer
surgery,”StatisticsinMedicine,vol.41,no.19,pp.3804–3819,2022.
32
[103] N. Binder, H. Dette, J. Franz, D. Zöller, R. Suarez-Ibarrola, C. Gratzke, et al., “Data mining
in urology: Understanding real-world treatment pathways for lower urinary tract systems via
explorationofbigdata,”EuropeanUrologyFocus,vol.8,no.2,pp.391–393,2022.
[104] K. G. M. Moons, A. P. Kengne, D. E. Grobbee, P. Royston, Y. Vergouwe, D. G. Altman, et
al.,“Riskpredictionmodels:II.externalvalidation,modelupdating,andimpactassessment,”
Heart,vol.98,no.9,pp.691–698,2012.
[105] V. M. T. de Jong, K. G. M. Moons, M. J. C. Eijkemans, R. D. Riley, and T. P. A. Debray,
“Developing more generalizable prediction models from pooled studies and large clustered
datasets,”StatisticsinMedicine,vol.40,no.15,pp.3533–3559,2021.
[106] G. R. Klein, J. B. Greenhouse, B. D. Stein, and H. J. Seltman, “Characterizing patterns of
care using administrative claims data: ADHD treatment in children,” Health Services and
OutcomesResearchMethodology,vol.11,no.3,pp.115–133,2011.
[107] Z. Huang, W. Dong, H. Duan, and H. Li, “Similarity measure between patient traces for clin-
ical pathway analysis: Problem, method, and applications,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and
HealthInformatics,vol.18,no.1,pp.4–14,2014.
[108] W. Ren, Y. Tang, Q. Sun, C. Zhao, and Q.-L. Han, “Visual semantic segmentation based
on few/zero-shot learning: An overview,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, pp. 1–21,
2023.
[109] B. M. Mathisen, A. Aamodt, K. Bach, and H. Langseth, “Learning similarity measures from
data,”ProgressinArtificialIntelligence,vol.9,no.2,pp.129–143,2020.
[110] J. Wu, H. Shen, Y.-D. Li, Z.-B. Xiao, M.-Y. Lu, and C.-L. Wang, “Learning a hybrid similarity
measureforimageretrieval,”PatternRecognition,vol.46,no.11,pp.2927–2939,2013.
[111] K. Liu, A. Bellet, and F. Sha, “Similarity learning for high-dimensional sparse data,” in In-
ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2015, pp. 653–662. [Online].
Available:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v38/liu15.html.
[112] C. H. Grønbech, M. F. Vording, P. Timshel, C. K. Sønderby, T. H. Pers, and O. Winther, “sc-
VAE:Variationalauto-encodersforsingle-cellgeneexpressiondata,”Bioinformatics,vol.36,
no.16,pp.4415–4422,2020.
[113] M. Hackenberg, P. Harms, M. Pfaffenlehner, A. Pechmann, J. Kirschner, T. Schmidt, et al.,
“Deep dynamic modeling with just two time points: Can we still allow for individual trajecto-
ries?”BiometricalJournal,2022.
[114] H. S. Jomaa, L. Schmidt-Thieme, and J. Grabocka, “Dataset2Vec: Learning dataset meta-
features,”DataMiningandKnowledgeDiscovery,vol.35,no.3,pp.964–985,2021.
[115] A. Nikolakopoulou, D. Mavridis, and G. Salanti, “Planning future studies based on the preci-
sion of network meta-analysis results,” Statistics in Medicine, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 978–1000,
2016.
[116] C. Kreutz, “An easy and efficient approach for testing identifiability,” Bioinformatics, vol. 34,
no.11,pp.1913–1921,2018.
33
[117] J. K. H. Franke, G. Köhler, N. Awad, and F. Hutter, “Neural architecture evolution in deep
reinforcementlearningforcontinuouscontrol,”2020.arXiv:1910.12824,pre-published.
[118] F. Wenzel, J. Snoek, D. Tran, and R. Jenatton, “Hyperparameter ensembles for robust-
nessanduncertaintyquantification,”inAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
2020,pp. 6514–6527.[Online]. Available:https://papers.neurips.cc/paper_files/pa
per/2020/hash/481fbfa59da2581098e841b7afc122f1-Abstract.html.
[119] B. Bischl, M. Binder, M. Lang, T. Pielok, J. Richter, S. Coors, et al., “Hyperparameter op-
timization: Foundations, algorithms, best practices, and open challenges,” Wiley Interdisci-
plinaryReviews:DataMiningandKnowledgeDiscovery,vol.13,no.2,e1484,2023.
[120] Y.Yuan,“Onthepoweroffoundationmodels,”inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearn-
ing,2023,pp.40519–40530.[Online].Available:https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202
/yuan23b.html.
[121] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, S. Kadavath, and D. Song, “Using self-supervised learning can
improve model robustness and uncertainty,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/pa
per/2019/file/a2b15837edac15df90721968986f7f8e-Paper.pdf.
[122] H. Wang, T. Fu, Y. Du, W. Gao, K. Huang, Z. Liu, et al., “Scientific discovery in the age of
artificialintelligence,”Nature,vol.620,no.7972,pp.47–60,2023.
[123] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, et al., “Attention
is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017. [Online].
Available:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee24
3547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
[124] M.Stern,N.Shazeer,andJ.Uszkoreit,“Blockwiseparalleldecodingfordeepautoregressive
models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/hash/c4127b9194fe856
2c64dc0f5bf2c93bc-Abstract.html.
[125] L. Zhao, Z. Zhang, T. Chen, D. Metaxas, and H. Zhang, “Improved transformer for high-
resolution gans,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021, pp. 18367–
18380.[Online].Available:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/98dce
83da57b0395e163467c9dae521b-Abstract.html.
[126] Y. Jiang, S. Chang, and Z. Wang, “TransGAN: Two pure transformers can make one strong
GAN,andthatcanscaleup,”inAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,2021,
pp.14745–14758.[Online].Available:https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/h
ash/7c220a2091c26a7f5e9f1cfb099511e3-Abstract.html.
[127] C.-H. Lin, E. Yumer, O. Wang, E. Shechtman, and S. Lucey, “ST-GAN: Spatial transformer
generative adversarial networks for image compositing,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puterVisionandPatternRecognition,2018,pp.9455–9464.
34
[128] X. Li, V. Metsis, H. Wang, and A. H. H. Ngu, “TTS-GAN: A transformer-based time-series
generative adversarial network,” in Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Springer International
Publishing,2022,pp.133–143.
[129] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are
unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.op
enai.com/better-language-models/language_models_are_unsupervised_multitask
_learners.pdf.
[130] T.Wu,S.He,J.Liu,S.Sun,K.Liu,Q.-L.Han,etal.,“AbriefoverviewofChatGPT:Thehis-
tory, status quo and potential future development,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica,
vol.10,no.5,pp.1122–1136,2023.
[131] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tionaltransformersforlanguageunderstanding,”inConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2019,
pp.4171–4186.
[132] R. Chowdhury, N. Bouatta, S. Biswas, C. Floristean, A. Kharkar, K. Roy, et al., “Single-
sequence protein structure prediction using a language model and deep learning,” Nature
Biotechnology,vol.40,no.11,pp.1617–1623,2022.
[133] K. Han, Y. Wang, H. Chen, X. Chen, J. Guo, Z. Liu, et al., “A survey on vision transformer,”
IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence,vol.45,no.1,pp.87–110,
2022.
[134] S.Khan,M.Naseer,M.Hayat,S.W.Zamir,F.S.Khan,andM.Shah,“Transformersinvision:
Asurvey,”ACMComputingSurveys(CSUR),vol.54,pp.1–41,10s2022.
[135] S. Müller, N. Hollmann, S. P. Arango, J. Grabocka, and F. Hutter, “Transformers can do
Bayesianinference,”inInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentation,2022.[Online].
Available:https://openreview.net/pdf?id=KSugKcbNf9.
[136] N.Hollmann,S.Müller,K.Eggensperger,andF.Hutter,“TabPFN:Atransformerthatsolves
small tabular classification problems in a second,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=cp5Pvc
I6w8_.
[137] N. Hollmann, S. Müller, L. Purucker, A. Krishnakumar, M. Körfer, S. B. Hoo, et al., “Accu-
rate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model,” Nature, vol. 637, no. 8045,
pp.319–326,2025.
[138] P.Lewis,E.Perez,A.Piktus,F.Petroni,V.Karpukhin,N.Goyal,etal.,“Retrieval-augmented
generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 2020, pp. 9459–9474. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.c
c/paper/2020/hash/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Abstract.html.
[139] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, et al., “Retrieval-augmented generation for
largelanguagemodels:Asurvey,”2024.arXiv:2312.10997,pre-published.
35
[140] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language models in retrieval-
augmented generation,” Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 16, pp. 17754–
17762,2024.
[141] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Zhong, and J. Zhu, “Few-shot continual learning: A brain-inspired ap-
proach,”2021.arXiv:2104.09034,pre-published.
[142] X.Sun,B.Wang,Z.Wang,H.Li,H.Li,andK.Fu,“Researchprogressonfew-shotlearning
for remote sensing image interpretation,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth
ObservationsandRemoteSensing,vol.14,pp.2387–2402,2021.
[143] J.Deng,W. Dong,R.Socher, L.-J.Li,K. Li,and L.Fei-Fei,“ImageNet: Alarge-scalehierar-
chical image database,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
IEEE,2009,pp.248–255.
[144] X.Wang,Y.Peng,L.Lu,Z.Lu,M.Bagheri,andR.M.Summers,“ChestX-ray8:Hospital-scale
chestx-raydatabaseandbenchmarksonweakly-supervisedclassificationandlocalizationof
commonthoraxdiseases,”inIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,
IEEE,2017.
[145] F. Shakeri, M. Boudiaf, S. Mohammadi, I. Sheth, M. Havaei, I. B. Ayed, et al., “FHIST: A
benchmark for few-shot classification ofhistological images,” 2022. arXiv: 2206.00092, pre-
published.
[146] N.C.F.Codella,D.Gutman,M.E.Celebi,B.Helba,M.A.Marchetti,S.W.Dusza,etal.,“Skin
lesionanalysistowardmelanomadetection:Achallengeatthe2017internationalsymposium
on biomedical imaging (ISBI), hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (ISIC),”
inIEEEInternationalSymposiumonBiomedicalImaging,2018,pp.168–172.
[147] M. Samiei, T. Würfl, T. Deleu, M. Weiss, F. Dutil, T. Fevens, et al., “The TCGA meta-dataset
clinicalbenchmark,”2019.arXiv:1910.08636,pre-published.
[148] C.Finn,P.Abbeel,andS.Levine,“Model-agnosticmeta-learningforfastadaptationofdeep
networks,”inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning,2017,pp.1126–1135.[Online].
Available:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/finn17a.html.
[149] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization,” presented at the In-
ternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2018.[Online].Available:https://op
enreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
[150] J. Vanschoren, “Meta-learning,” in Automated Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Chal-
lenges,Cham:SpringerInternationalPublishing,2019,pp.35–61.
[151] S. Jadon and A. Jadon, “An overview of deep learning architectures in few-shot learning
domain,”2023.arXiv:2008.06365,pre-published.
[152] P.HitzlerandM.K.Sarker,Neuro-SymbolicArtificialIntelligence:TheStateoftheArt.Ams-
terdamBerlinWashington,DC:IOSPress,2022,408pp.
[153] P.Hitzler,A.Eberhart,M.Ebrahimi,M.K.Sarker,andL.Zhou,“Neuro-symbolicapproaches
inartificialintelligence,”NationalScienceReview,vol.9,no.6,nwac035,2022.
36
[154] A. d’Avila Garcez and L. C. Lamb, “Neurosymbolic AI: The 3rd wave,” Artificial Intelligence
Review,vol.56,no.11,pp.12387–12406,2023.
[155] A. Sheth, K. Roy, and M. Gaur, “Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence (why, what, and how),”
IEEEIntelligentSystems,vol.38,no.03,pp.56–62,2023.
[156] F. J. Bruggeman and H. V. Westerhoff, “The nature of systems biology,” Trends in Microbiol-
ogy,vol.15,no.1,pp.45–50,2007.
[157] R. Li, L. Li, Y. Xu, and J. Yang, “Machine learning meets omics: Applications and perspec-
tives,”BriefingsinBioinformatics,vol.23,no.1,pp.1–22,2022.
[158] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural ordinary differential
equations,”2019.arXiv:1806.07366,pre-published.
[159] G. Köber, S. Pooseh, H. Engen, A. Chmitorz, M. Kampa, A. Schick, et al., “Individualizing
deep dynamic models for psychological resilience data,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1,
p.8061,2022.
[160] C.Rackauckas,Y.Ma,J.Martensen,C.Warner,K.Zubov,R.Supekar,etal.,“Universaldif-
ferentialequationsforscientificmachinelearning,”2021.arXiv:2001.04385,pre-published.
[161] J. H. Lagergren, J. T. Nardini, R. E. Baker, M. J. Simpson, and K. B. Flores, “Biologically-
informedneuralnetworksguidemechanisticmodelingfromsparseexperimentaldata,”PLOS
ComputationalBiology,vol.16,no.12,e1008462,2020.
[162] M.Innes,A.Edelman,K.Fischer,C.Rackauckas,E.Saba,V.B.Shah,etal.,“Adifferentiable
programmingsystemtobridgemachinelearningandscientificcomputing,”2019.arXiv:190
7.07587,pre-published.
[163] R.vandeSchoot,S.Depaoli,R.King,B.Kramer,K.Märtens,M.G.Tadesse,etal.,“Bayesian
statisticsandmodelling,”NatureReviewsMethodsPrimers,vol.1,no.1,pp.1–26,2021.
[164] Y. Ba, G. Zhao, and A. Kadambi, “Blending diverse physical priors with neural networks,”
2019.arXiv:1910.00201,pre-published.
[165] J. A. Gongora, H. P. Marshall, C. Hase, T. Bradberry, and S. Ballerini, “Applications of deep
learning and domain adaptation to the study of mountain snow,” American Geophysical
Union, vol. 2019, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/20
19AGUFM.H33L2110G.
[166] M.Raissi,“Deephiddenphysicsmodels:Deeplearningofnonlinearpartialdifferentialequa-
tions,”JournalofMachineLearningResearch,vol.19,p.25,2018.[Online].Available:http
s://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume19/18-046/18-046.pdf.
[167] L. von Rueden, S. Houben, K. Cvejoski, C. Bauckhage, and N. Piatkowski, “Informed pre-
trainingonpriorknowledge,”2022.arXiv:2205.11433,pre-published.
[168] L.vonRueden,S.Mayer,K.Beckh,B.Georgiev,S.Giesselbach,R.Heese,etal.,“Informed
machine learning – a taxonomy and survey of integrating prior knowledge into learning sys-
tems,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 614–633,
2023.
37
[169] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and L. Yang, “Physics-
informedmachinelearning,”NatureReviewsPhysics,vol.3,no.6,pp.422–440,2021.
[170] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. [Online]. Avail-
able:http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[171] M.M.RahmanandD.N.Davis,“Addressingtheclassimbalanceprobleminmedicaldatasets,”
InternationalJournalofMachineLearningandComputing,pp.224–228,2013.
[172] S. Vollmer, B. A. Mateen, G. Bohner, F. J. Király, R. Ghani, P. Jonsson, et al., “Machine
learning and artificial intelligence research for patient benefit: 20 critical questions on trans-
parency,replicability,ethics,andeffectiveness,”BMJ,vol.368,2020.
[173] M. K. Uçar, M. Nour, H. Sindi, K. Polat, et al., “The effect of training and testing process on
machinelearninginbiomedicaldatasets,”MathematicalProblemsinEngineering,vol.2020,
2020.
[174] M. Rosenblatt, L. Tejavibulya, R. Jiang, S. Noble, and D. Scheinost, “Data leakage inflates
prediction performance in connectome-based machine learning models,” Nature Communi-
cations,vol.15,no.1,p.1829,2024.
[175] Q.-Y.Li,B.-H.Tang,Y.-E.Wu,B.-F.Yao,W.Zhang,Y.Zheng,etal.,“Machinelearning:Anew
approach for dose individualization,” Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, vol. 115, no. 4,
pp.727–744,2024.
[176] M.D.Wilkinson,M.Dumontier,I.J.Aalbersberg,G.Appleton,M.Axton,A.Baak,etal.,“The
FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and stewardship,” Scientific Data,
vol.3,no.1,pp.1–9,2016.
38
