1
SpeechPrompt: Prompting Speech Language Models
for Speech Processing Tasks
Kai-Wei Chang, Haibin Wu, Yu-Kai Wang, Yuan-Kuei Wu, Hua Shen, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Iu-thing Kang,
Shang-Wen Li, Hung-yi Lee
Abstract—Prompting has become a practical method for uti-
Task A loss Task B loss Task C loss
lizing pre-trained language models (LMs). This approach offers
several advantages. It allows an LM to adapt to new tasks
with minimal training and parameter updates, thus achieving
efficiencyinbothstorageandcomputation.Additionally,prompt- Expert Expert Expert
Downstream Model A Downstream Model B Downstream Model C
ing modifies only the LM’s inputs and harnesses the generative
capabilities of language models to address various downstream
tasksinaunifiedmanner.Thissignificantlyreducestheneedfor
Speech Speech Speech
humanlaborindesigningtask-specificmodels.Theseadvantages Representation Model Representation Model Representation Model
become even more evident as the number of tasks served by
the LM scales up. Motivated by the strengths of prompting, we
are the first to explore the potential of prompting speech LMs
in the domain of speech processing. Recently, there has been
a growing interest in converting speech into discrete units for Pre-train, fine-tune paradigm
languagemodeling.Ourpioneerresearchdemonstratesthatthese
Prompting paradigm
quantized speech units are highly versatile within our unified Cross-entropy loss
prompting framework. Not only can they serve as class labels,
but they also contain rich phonetic information that can be re-
synthesizedbackintospeechsignalsforspeechgenerationtasks.
Specifically, we reformulate speech processing tasks into speech- Speech
to-unitgenerationtasks.Asaresult,wecanseamlesslyintegrate Language Model
tasks such as speech classification, sequence generation, and
speechgenerationwithinasingle,unifiedpromptingframework.
The experiment results show that the prompting method can
achieve competitive performance compared to the strong fine- Task A
tuning method based on self-supervised learning models with a Prompt
similarnumberoftrainableparameters.Thepromptingmethod
also shows promising results in the few-shot setting. Moreover,
with the advanced speech LMs coming into the stage, the
proposed prompting framework attains great potential. Fig.1. Comparisonofthe“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigmwiththeprompting
paradigm.The“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigminvolvesdesigningtask-specific
Index Terms—Prompting, speech language model, self- downstream models and loss functions by human experts, with distinct
supervised learning, representation learning models trained for each task. In contrast, the prompting paradigm handles
all downstream tasks in a unified manner, where only the prompt varies for
eachtask,whilethelanguagemodelremainsfixed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, self-supervised representation learning has be- in Fig. 1, requires delicately designing a task-specific down-
come an essential component in the speech processing streammodelandlossfunctionforeachtask.Thiscomplexity
field[1].Thespeechrepresentationmodelistrainedonalarge- significantly causes an increasing burden of human labor.
scale unlabeled corpus in a self-supervised learning (SSL) Furthermore, the requirement to train the expert downstream
manner. The learned representation has been demonstrated model alongside the optionally fine-tuned speech represen-
to be informative and can benefit a wide range of speech tation model leads to substantial computational and storage
processing tasks [2]–[4]. demands. This is especially challenging as the number of
When leveraging these speech representation models for a downstream tasks grows due to the necessity to store separate
downstreamtaskofinterest,atypicalapproachistofollowthe model parameters for each task.
“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigm[1],[5].Underthisparadigm, On the otherhand, researchers have exploredthe “prompt-
the representation models serve as feature extractors. The ing paradigm” [5] as an alternative method to leverage pre-
models encode speech into informative representations, which trained language models (LMs) to solve downstream tasks in
are subsequently fed into a task-specific model. This model, an efficient manner. Originating from the Natural Language
referred to as the expert downstream model, specializes in Processing (NLP) field, prompting refers to the technique
solving a specific speech processing task. While fine-tuning that finds a task-specific template or instruction, which is
often yields optimal performance, this paradigm, as depicted called prompt, to steer a pre-trained LM without modifying
4202
guA
32
]SA.ssee[
1v04031.8042:viXra
2
TABLEI In the table, we also compare the task-specific perfor-
COMPARATIVEANALYSISOFPROMPTINGAND“PRE-TRAIN,FINE-TUNE” mance and low-resource performance. The “pre-train, fine-
PARADIGMSACROSSVARIOUSCRITERIA.SYMBOLSUSED:✓INDICATESA
tune” paradigm delicately performs expert model and ob-
RELATIVEADVANTAGE.△DENOTESCOMPARABLEPERFORMANCE.×
INDICATESNOSIGNIFICANTADVANTAGE. jective engineering. Therefore, it usually shows advantages
when one wants to achieve better performance for a specific
Criterion Prompting Pre-trainFine-tune downstream task. On the other hand, prompting utilizes the
ObjectiveEngineering × ✓ prior knowledge of the LM, therefore usually achieving better
ExpertModelEngineering × ✓
performance in low-resource settings, such as the few-shot
Task-SpecificPerformance △ ✓
Low-resourcePerformance ✓ △ learning scenario.
StorageEfficiency ✓ × This paper focuses on prompting the textless speech lan-
ComputationEfficiency ✓ ×
guage models [18]–[20]. These models are a class of gen-
DeploymentEfficiency ✓ ×
erative LMs that are trained on discrete speech units ob-
tained by quantizing the SSL speech representations [21].
its architecture and parameters. For each specific task, these Discrete speech units have gained researchers’ attention be-
templates can be hand-crafted or identified through a search cause they offer several advantages: (1) Discrete units require
processandarecomposedofthemodel’svocabulary,knownas less storage space and transmission bitrate compared to raw
hardprompts[6],[7].Forinstance,insentimentclassification, waveforms [22]. (2) Discrete units contain essential acoustic
an input sentence ⟨S⟩ can be fit into a template: “⟨S⟩. It was and linguistic information while minimizing speaker-specific
.” and then fed into a pre-trained LM. The LM’s output information [21], which is useful for scenarios where privacy
(e.g., “great”, “terrible”) is then transformed into sentiment is a major concern [22], [23]. Mirroring the text LMs in the
classes (positive, negative) by a verbalizer [8], [9], which is NLP field, these textless speech LMs adopt discrete units
often a hand-crafted or a searched mapping function [10], as their vocabulary and undergo pre-training through tasks
enabling us to determine the sentiment of ⟨S⟩. Alternatively, like next token prediction [24] and the denoising sequence-
promptsarenotnecessarilytobehuman-readable.Researchers to-sequence [25] task. Thanks to these speech LMs, several
haveproposedapromptingmethodknownasprompttuning, works have demonstrated promising results in challenging
which involves learning continuous prompts [5], [11]–[14] speech processing tasks, including speech continuation [18]
within the model’s embedding space. These prompt vectors, and speech-to-speech translation [20]— tasks that are hard to
also called soft prompts, are trainable and have shown to be achieve with the traditional “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm.
effective and efficient for leveraging pre-trained models, with The textless property is particularly compelling since many
applications extending beyond the NLP field. For example, languages worldwide lack substantial text resources [26].
prompt tuning has been applied to computer vision [15] and These languages may either have no written form or lack a
speech processing [16]. standardizedwrittenformat.Bydirectlymodelingthephonetic
Thepromptingparadigmpresentsmultipleadvantagescom- and acoustic patterns, we can not only bypass the constraints
pared to the traditional “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm: and potential biases of written languages but also reduce the
(1) Training Efficiency: Only prompt vectors require up- need for paired speech-text data, which is often costly to get.
dating, offering better computational efficiency than the full Furthermore, the ability of these discrete units to encap-
model and downstream head training in the typical fine- sulate both acoustic and linguistic [18], [21] information
tuning paradigm. Moreover, reformulating downstream tasks without text supervision has opened up new opportunities for
into a unified sequence generation task eliminates the need prompting the speech LM for a variety of speech processing
for Expert Model Engineering (i.e., designing specialized tasks. Leveraging the unique characteristic of discrete units,
downstream models for each task) and Objective Engineering we reformulate (1) speech classification tasks (speech to
(i.e., designing loss functions for each downstream task). class label), (2) sequence generation tasks (speech to label
(2)InferenceUniformity:Withprompting,theLMremains sequence), and (3) speech generation tasks (speech to speech)
fixed, enabling a uniform forward process for diverse tasks. intoaunifiedspeech-to-unitgenerationtask.Inthemeantime,
Thetaskspecificityisdrivenbytheinputprompts,facilitating we propose utilizing a learnable verbalizer specifically for
in-batchtasking[11],[14],theconcurrenthandlingofmultiple addressingspeechclassificationandsequencegenerationtasks.
tasks within a single batch. Despiteitssimplicityasalineartransformation,thisverbalizer
(3)DeploymentScalability:Recently,languagemodelsare can effectively utilize the information encapsulated in the dis-
increasingly deployed as services. The low computational and creteunits,bridgingthatrichinformationwiththedownstream
storage demands of prompting offer significant advantages. labels. The experiment results show that with the proposed
This is because the LM does not require retraining when method, the speech LM can solve speech classification tasks
serving a user’s own dataset and task; instead, only task- and sequence generation tasks with competitive performance
specific prompts containing a small set of parameters need compared to the “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm. Also, thanks
to be identified. As the number of tasks or users grows, to the generative capability of the speech LMs, the proposed
the scalability and efficiency of prompting become even methodcanalsodeliverpromisingresultsonspeechgeneration
more beneficial [17]. The advantages of both the prompting tasks, which are challenging for the fine-tuning paradigm. All
paradigmandthe“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigmareillustrated the tasks are solved in a unified pipeline and with promising
in Table I. trainable parameter efficiency.
3
The advantages of the proposed unified prompt framework
are as follows: (1). We are pioneers in introducing prompt
46 28 17 13
engineering to the speech domain. Our proposed method Unit
achieves results comparable to the fine-tuning approach based Deduplicate Language Model
onself-supervisedlearning.(2).Comparedwiththe“pre-train, 46 46 28 28 17 13
fine-tune” paradigm, our unified framework is adaptable to
a wide range of speech tasks and eliminates the need for Quantizer 31 89 67 43 21 11
designingtask-specificdownstreammodelsandlossfunctions.
Thisapproachnotonlysavesconsiderableeffortbutalsopaves
the way for a universal speech model. (3). The learnable SSL Representation Model Unit-to-Speech
verbalizer boasts commendable explainability and adeptly uti- Decoder
Speech-to-Unit Encoder
lizes the semantic information within the discrete units. This
capacity allows for an effective linkage of that information
with the labels associated with various downstream tasks.
(4). The evolution from GSLM [18] to Unit mBART [20]
has significantly enhanced the performance of our prompt
Fig. 2. The textless speech LM. It consists of three components, including
framework. With more advanced speech LMs coming into the
(1)Thespeech-to-unitencoder,(2)theunitlanguagemodel,and(3)theunit-
stage,weanticipatethesedevelopmentswillelevateourmeth- to-speechdecoder.
ods to unprecedented levels of success. (5). Imagine a near
future where speech language models are offered in the cloud TABLEII
servers by major companies and widely adopted by numerous DATASIZEFORDIFFERENTFORMATSOFT-SECONDSPEECH.
smaller businesses. In this scenario, our prompt framework
Dataformat Datasize(bits) Sizeratio
utilizesdiscreteunits,whichsavestoragespace,speedupdata
Rawwaveform 16×16000×T 1
transmission, and potentially improve privacy. For example,
SSLrepresentation 32×1024×50×T 6.4
discrete speech units have demonstrated a tendency to reduce HuBERTunits(100clusters) 7×50×T 1×10−3
speaker (timbre) information [21]. Therefore, employing dis- HuBERTunits(1,000clusters) 10×50×T 2×10−3
crete speech units can potentially mitigate privacy concerns
compared to transmitting raw speech 1.
HuBERT representation with a dimension of 768 and a frame
II. RELATEDWORKS rate of 50 per second results in 6.4 times the data size using
floating-pointvectors(32-bit).Discreteunitswith100clusters
A. Self-supervised Speech Representation and Discretization
(approximately 7 bits) and 1,000 clusters (approximately 10
The exploration of speech representations through Self- bits) offer even more efficient speech data formats.
Supervised Learning (SSL) objectives has evolved into a
crucialresearchtopicwithinthespeechresearchareainrecent
years. By utilizing different SSL pre-training tasks, the repre- B. Textless Speech Language Models
sentation models can mainly be grouped into three categories: TextlessspeechLMsregarddiscretespeechunitsaspseudo-
predictivemodels[29],[30],contrastivemodels[31]–[33],and text and adopt them as LM’s vocabulary. Leveraging these
generativemodels[34]–[36].ToleverageSSLrepresentations, discrete units, speech LMs are trained to perform language
a common way is to build specialized downstream models on modeling tasks that mirror those in the NLP field.
top of SSL representations and fine-tune the entire model or As shown in Fig. 2, in the textless speech language model,
onlythedownstreammodelsforsuperviseddownstreamtasks. there are three components: (1) speech-to-unit encoder, (2)
Based on this, SUPERB [2] benchmarks SSL speech models unit language model, and (3) unit-to-speech decoder. Speech-
with a wide variety of downstream tasks. to-unitencodercomprisesanSSLrepresentationmodel,such
Although using continuous SSL representations as features as HuBERT [29], paired with a quantizer, like K-means.
for downstream tasks can yield stronger performance [37], The continuous representation extracted by the SSL model
there’s a growing trend of adopting discrete speech units is clustered into discrete units. These discrete units have
derived by quantizing the SSL representations [22], [38]. A showntoencapsulaterichphoneticandlinguisticinformation,
common approach involves applying the K-means algorithm thereby effectively representing speech [18], [21]. In conven-
totheSSLrepresentations,quantizingthemintoclusters.Dis- tional speech language models, these discrete units undergo
creteunitssignificantlyreducestoragespaceandtransmission a deduplication process, which removes consecutive repeated
bandwidthcomparedtorawwaveformsandSSLfeatures[22], unitstoformamorecompactsequenceoftokensforlanguage
[37].Forinstance,asdiscussedin [22]andshowninTableII, modeling. The unit language model is an LM that performs
a T-second 16kHz waveform in 16-bit format requires 16 × generative language modeling based on the discrete units. For
16,000 × T bits for storage and transmission. In contrast, instance, in GSLM [18], the unit language model conducts
the next-token-prediction task akin to GPTs [24], [39]. Unit
1Theextentofspeakerinformationremovaldependsonthecontext.Recent
mBART performs the denoising sequence reconstruction task
studies[27],[28]showthatwhenthenumberofdiscreteunitsincreases,the
retentionofspeakerinformationmaybecomemorenoticeable. similar to the BART model [25]. The unit-to-speech decoder
4
Speech Classification Sequence Generation Speech Generation TABLEIII
NOTATIONTABLE
[Active] [Lights] [Bedroom] This is a book.
Symbol Description
Sec. III-D
u Unitintheunitsequence
Verbalizer Verbalizer Speech Decoder ux Discretizedspeech,sourceunitsequence
(Optionally learnable) (Optionally learnable) (off-the-shelf) uy Generatedtargetunitsequence
C Context,includingtheinputdiscretizedspeech,sequenceof
37 65 38 28 98 eos speech-to-unit generation unitsbeforethecurrentunitandthetaskprompts
Sec. III-C
ztj Logitforj-thunitattimestept
Sec. III-B
P(uj|Ct) Probabilityofunituj attimesteptgivencontextCt
Unit Language Model Sec. III-A E Encoderinencoder-decoderunitLM
D Decoderindecoder-onlyorencoder-decoderunitLM
46 29 117 24 67 13 e(u) UnitLM’svocabularyembeddingvectorforaunitu
IC ASR ST V Vocabularyset{u1,u2,...,u |V| }
Quantizer g(i) Hiddenrepresentationinputtothei-thlayerofencoder
PR SF SC h(i) Hiddenrepresentationinputtothei-thlayerofdecoder
SSL Speech Model
T Sequencelengthofencoder’shiddenrepresentation
Downstream T′ Sequencelengthofdecoder’shiddenrepresentation
Tasks Prompt
p Trainablepromptsequence[p1,...p
l
]withpromptlengthl
y Downstreamlabelsequence[y1,...y T′]
|Y| Numberofclassesinthedownstreamtask
Fig.3. Anoverviewoftheproposedframework,wherealldownstreamtasks
aretreatedasspeech-to-unitgenerationprocesses.Thegenerationofunitsis papertobridgethegapbetweendiscreteunitsanddownstream
directed by the task-specific prompts that guide the unit language model. A
task labels, enhancing both explainability and performance.
verbalizerorspeechdecoderthenbridgesthegapbetweenthegeneratedunits
andthecorrespondingdownstreamlabels. WavPrompt[45]isalsoapioneerinstudyingtheprompting
paradigm in speech processing. WavPrompt consists of a text
LM, GPT-2 [39], and an audio encoder, wav2vec 2.0 [32].
is responsible for transforming the generated discrete unit se- The text LM is prompted with audio embeddings and text
quences back into continuous speech signals. The architecture questions to perform few-shot speech understanding tasks. In
is akin to the conventional speech synthesis models [40], [41] contrast to SpeechPrompt, which uses textless speech LM for
that train on the unit sequence and speech signal. various speech processing tasks, WavPrompt employs a text
In addition to GSLM and Unit mBART, there are other LM and performs limited speech understanding tasks.
notable speech language models such as AudioLM [42], On the other hand, the work [46] studies hand-crafted
TWIST [43], and SPECTRON [44]. These models bring promptsforaspeechrecognitionmodel,Whisper[47],forvar-
additionalcomplexityandadvancementstothefield;however, ious speech recognition tasks. The backbone model, Whisper,
theyarenotcurrentlyfullyopen-sourced.Asthedevelopment istrainedusinglarge-scalespeech-textpaireddata.Incontrast,
of speech LMs continues to evolve, there is significant po- ourworkpromptsatextlessspeechLM,andwenotonlyfocus
tential for our framework to be expanded and utilized more onspeechrecognition,atypeofsequencegenerationtask,but
extensively in future research and applications. also explore speech generation tasks.
Anotherbranchofutilizingapre-trainedmodel’scapability
fordifferenttasksismodelreprogramming[48],[49].In[50],
C. Prompting and Reprogramming in Speech Processing
[51],theinputdata(targetdomain)arefirsttransformedwitha
Thisjournalpaperisanextensionofourpreviouswork[16], task-specific function to become the reprogrammed data. The
where we explored the concept of prompting on speech LM, pre-trainedacousticmodelisthencapableofgeneratinglabels
particularly GSLM. Previous work [16] showed promising for this reprogrammed data. These labels (source domain)
results in speech classification tasks such as spoken com- are then mapped to the classes of downstream tasks (target
mand recognition and intent classification and demonstrated domain)byamappingfunction.Thismappingfunctionserves
better parameter efficiency compared to the “pre-train, fine- the same role as the verbalizer in the prompting method and
tune” paradigm. However, despite achieving notable results is usually a random mapping in the reprogramming literature.
in sequence generation tasks like ASR and slot filling, its We also adopt the idea of reprogramming a foundation model
performance still lags behind the fine-tuning method. In this for solving various tasks. For example, in speech classifica-
paper,wefurtherexploreanadvancedencoder-decoderspeech tion tasks and sequence generation tasks, the speech LM is
LM,UnitmBART,acrossabroaderrangeofspeechprocessing prompted/reprogrammed to adapt to the distribution of the
tasks. This includes a more diverse set of speech classifica- target domain (the class label and the transcription).
tion tasks, as well as speech generation tasks. The results
are more promising: (1) Prompting Unit mBART achieves
III. METHOD
competitive performance in sequence generation tasks and (2) The overview of the proposed framework is depicted in
Prompting Unit mBART is well-suited for speech generation Fig. 3. The input speech waveform is encoded into a se-
tasks, thereby establishing a unified prompting framework for quence of discrete units using an SSL speech model and a
various speech processing tasks. Additionally, compared to quantizer. The unit LM (Section III-A) then takes this unit
our previous work, we introduce a learnable verbalizer in this sequence and performs conditional generation based on the
5
C A T [UP]
verbalizer verbalizer
Attention Module
65 28 98 eos 65 eos
Encoder Decoder Decoder
(Transformer encoders) (Transformer decoders) (Transformer decoders)
g h h
pI Embedding Table e pI Embedding Table e pI Embedding Table e
pK 37 12 28 98 bos 65 28 98 37 12 28 98 sep 65
pV
Discretized speech (Autoregressive generation) Discretized speech
(a) Prompts at the input of the Transformer layer (b) Prompting Encoder-Decoder unit language model (c) Prompting Decoder-only unit language model
Fig.4. Anoverviewoftheproposedframework,wherealldownstreamtasksaretreatedasspeech-to-unitgenerationprocesses.Thegenerationofunitsis
directed by the task-specific prompts that guide the unit language model. A verbalizer or speech decoder then bridges the gap between the generated units
andthecorrespondingdownstreamlabels.
task-specificprompts.Thedesignoftask-specificpromptswill 1) Encoder-Decoder Unit LM: The encoder-decoder unit
be illustrated in Section III-B. The prompts steer the unit LM includes the encoder E and decoder D based on Trans-
LM to solve the downstream speech processing task, which is former.Thediscretizedspeechisfirstprocessedbytheencoder
reformulatedintoaspeech-to-unitgenerationtaskasdiscussed E to form part of the enriched context that the decoder D
in Section III-C. The resulting unit sequence is transformed performs cross-attention on to guide the generation of the
into the downstream task’s target through a verbalizer (for discrete units. The encoder E is composed of multiple layers
speechclassificationandsequencegenerationtasks)orthrough that process the input unit sequence:
a pre-trained speech decoder (for speech generation tasks) as
g(1) =[e(ux),e(ux),...,e(ux)], (2)
discussed in Section III-D. The notations used in the section 1 2 T
are listed in Table III. whereT isthesequencelengthande(·):Z(cid:55)→Rd denotesthe
vocabulary embedding table, which transforms a discrete unit
A. Unit Language Models u ∈ Z into its corresponding embedding vector e(u) ∈ Rd,
and d is the embedding dimension. In the encoder, the i-th
This subsection explains the backbone unit language model
layerreceiveshiddenrepresentationg(i) =[g(i),g(i),...,g(i)]
inourpromptframework.AsshowninFig.4,theseunitLMs 1 2 T
as input and outputs g(i+1). The decoder layers operate
receive discretized speech units sequence ux and trainable
similarly, with each taking input h(i) = [h(i),h(i),...,h(i)],
prompts p as inputs, subsequently using them to generate 1 2 T′
target unit sequence uy for downstream speech processing andoutputsh(i+1),whereT′ representsthedecodersequence
length, which increases incrementally during the autoregres-
tasks.
sive process.
Without loss of generality, in this paper, we investigate
2) Decoder-only Unit LM: In the decoder-only LM, the
twovariantsofwidely-adoptedunitLMsbasedonTransform-
model lacks the encoder and relies solely on the decoder
ers [52]: (1) The decoder-only unit LM that mimics the GPT
D, which functions in an analogous fashion to the encoder-
architecture [24], and (2) The encoder-decoder unit LM that
decodersetupbutwithouttheencoder’sguidance.Withoutthe
mirrorstheBARTlanguagemodel[25].Bothmodeltypesem-
encoder, the discretized source speech ux is integrated at the
ploy a causal decoder and are characterized as autoregressive
beginning of the sequence, serving as the initial context for
LMs, enabling the capability to generate outputs of varying
lengths. Specifically, the probability of each unit uy ∈ uy thedecodertopredictthesubsequentunits.Aseparationtoken
t ⟨sep⟩ is inserted in between the source unit sequence ux and
generatedbythemodelatthetimesteptisconditionedonthe
the generated units uy. Therefore, for each timestep t in the
preceding context, denoted by C . The context C includes
t t
the input discretized source speech ux, the task prompts p, autoregressive process, the input to the decoder D is:
and the units uy generated preceding the timestep t in the
autoregressive p < ro t cess. Formally, the autoregressive model h(1) =[e(ux),e(⟨sep⟩),e(uy 1 ),...,e(uy <t )]. (3)
generates the probability of a unit u within a vocabulary
j
V = {u 1 ,u 2 ,...,u |V| } at timestep t given the context C t B. Prompt Tuning
as:
As depicted in Fig. 3, the speech LM is capable of per-
eztj forming predefined speech tasks when provided with various
P(u |C )= , (1)
j t (cid:80)|V| eztk types of prompts. In this subsection, we will elaborate on the
k=1 process of prompt design.
wherez ∈R|V|×1 isthelogitforthej-thunitattimestep Prompting employs task-specific templates, known as
tj
t, and the denominator is the sum of exponentiated logits for prompts,tosteerthegenerationprocessoftheLM.Thistech-
all units at that timestep. niqueinvolvesfreezingtheLM’sparameterswhileintegrating
6
prompts as part of the input. Our method, inspired by the [uy,...,uy ,⟨eos⟩]. Each unit uy represents a discrete token
1 T′ t
prompt tuning approaches [12], [14], is implemented in two corresponding to the character y in the target character se-
t
positions:(1)attheinputoftheunitLM,termedinputprompt quencey =[y ,...,y ].Themappingfromunitstocharacters
1 T′
tuning, and (2) at the input of each Transformer layer, termed is facilitated by the verbalizer, detailed in Section III-D. For
deep prompt tuning. speech classification tasks like spoken command recognition
1) Input Prompt Tuning: Inspired by the method in [14], (SCR), which involve single-label classification, the model’s
input prompt tuning prepends continuous prompt vectors at goal is to classify an utterance into a predefined category.
the LM’s input. Specifically, the prompts are prepended at the Instead of directly predicting a label y , it generates a unit
1
embedding sequence of the first layer’s input h(1) (and g(1) sequence uy = [uy,⟨eos⟩], where uy will be transformed
1 1
for Encodoer-Decoder model): into the label y . In speech generation tasks, the generated
1
unit sequence can be synthesized back into the target speech
h(1) ←Concat(pI,h(1)), (4)
signal using an off-the-shelf unit-to-speech decoder. Notably,
g(1) ←Concat(pI,g(1)), (5) theautoregressivenatureofspeechLMsallowsthemtohandle
where pI = [pI,pI,...,pI] represents a series of prompt varying label lengths across different tasks, thus enabling a
vectors p∈Rd a 1 t th 2 e input l of the unit LM, with l indicating unified framework.
the prompt length.
2) Deep Prompt Tuning: Inspired by prefix-tuning [12], D. Verbalizer and Speech Decoder
deep prompt tuning involves concatenating prompt vectors at Within the prompting paradigm, the verbalizer [8], [9] v(·)
theinputoftheTransformerlayer.Specifically,itmodifiesthe is a label-mapping module, which establishes the connection
inputoftheattentionmodulestoguidetheforwardprocessof between the downstream task labels and the LM’s vocabu-
the LM. The self-attention module at the beginning of each lary. For speech LM, the vocabulary is the discrete units.
transformer layer takes the Query (Q), Key (K), and Value The verbalizer can adopt various forms, including random
(V) as input: mapping [51], [53], [54] and heuristic methods [16], we refer
(cid:18) QKT(cid:19) to this as “fixed verbalizer” since the mapping is pre-defined
Attn(Q,K,V)=softmax √ V, (6) and does not include updates. On the other hand, to generate
d
√ k speech signal, a speech decoder is employed to synthesize
where d k , the square root of the dimensionality of the key waveform from discrete unit sequence 2.
vectors, scales the dot product to ensure normalization of the 1) FixedVerbalizer: Thefixedverbalizerestablishesastatic
attention weights by the softmax function. For self-attention, mappingbetweenthedownstreamtasklabelandauniqueunit.
the matrices Q, K, and V are projections of the same input g For example, in the ASR task, it might map the character
or h transformed by the weight matrices W Q , W K , and W V , “a” to “unit 28” and “b” to “unit 72.” In spoken command
respectively. Trainable prompt vectors are prepended to the recognition(SCR),itcouldmapthecommand“[UP]”to“unit
input of each transformer layer, affecting both Key (K) and 65,” following either a random mapping or a frequency-based
Value (V) matrices in the attention mechanism: approach [16]. Once established, this mapping remains static
K ←Concat(pK,h)W , (7) withoutfurtherlearningoradaptation.Inpractice,withafixed
K
verbalizer,themostprobableunitateachtimesteptisselected
V ←Concat(pV,h)W , (8)
V and directly converted to the downstream task’s label y .
t
where pK = [pK,pK,...,pK] and pV = [pV,pV,...,pV] 2) SpeechDecoder: Forspeechgenerationtasks,wherethe
1 2 l 1 2 l
are series of trainable prompt vectors for key and value, targetoutputisaspeechsignalratherthanasequenceoflabels,
respectively, and has the same prompt length l as pI. the discrete units can be synthesized back into speech signals
Similar adjustments are applied to the encoder’s represen- using a pre-trained, off-the-shelf unit-to-speech decoder. This
tationg forencoder-decoderunitLM.Itiscrucialtonotethat speech decoder is self-supervised and trained with pairs of
throughouttheprompttuningprocess,onlythepromptvectors discrete units and their corresponding speech. In this work,
are trainable. The embedding table and the unit LM remain we employ a speech decoder that corresponds to the given
fixed. unit LM, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
C. Speech-to-Unit Generation E. Learnable Verbalizer
In this paper, we focus on leveraging the generative ca- Fixed verbalizers can lead to subpar performance in speech
pabilities of autoregressive speech LMs to handle various processingtasksbecause,unlikethedistinctsemanticmeaning
downstream tasks. Specifically, we recast speech processing present in NLP vocabulary, the vocabulary of discrete speech
tasks,includingspeechclassification,sequencegeneration,and units lacks clear semantic meanings. To address this, we
speech generation, into a unified speech-to-unit generation
2While the term “verbalizer” is usually associated with the concept of
task. In this approach, speech LM takes discretized speech as
“speaking”, we use it here to refer to the label-mapping module in line
inputandgeneratesasequenceofdiscreteunitscorresponding withthepromptingparadigminNLP[9],[10],[55].Theverbalizerconnects
to the intended output for the task at hand. the LM’s output (discrete tokens or probability distributions) to the labels
ofdownstreamtasks,facilitatingtask-orientedresponses.Ontheotherhand,
In sequence generation tasks, like automatic speech recog-
the “speech decoder” is responsible for transforming the LM’s outputs into
nition (ASR), the model generates a unit sequence uy = audiblespeech.
7
C A T eos TABLEIV
C A T eos
THEDOWNSTREAMTASKSPERFORMEDINTHISPAPER,INCLUDING
Linear Transformation SPEECHCLASSIFICATION,SEQUENCEGENERATION,ANDSPEECH
Learnable Verbalizer GENERATIONTASKS.LANGUAGEABBREVIATIONSAREINISO639-1
... ... ... ... FORMAT.N CLASS :NUMBEROFCLASSESFOREACHDOWNSTREAMTASK.
|ux|:AVERAGEDISCRETEUNITLENGTHOFTHEUTTERANCE.|u
de
|:
AVERAGEDEDUPLICATEDDISCRETEUNITLENGTHOFTHEUTTERANCE.
Decoder Transformed Embedding Table |y|:AVERAGELABELLENGTH.
(Transformer decoders) Z
softmax Task Dataset Language N class |ux| |u de | |y|
Embedding Table weighted sum SpeechClassification
GoogleSCv1 en 12 48 25 1
bos C A T ArabicSC ar 16 41 25 1
SCR LithuanianSC lt 15 51 28 1
(Autoregressive generation) Vocabulary (Units) Embedding Table DM-SC zh 19 169 68 1
GraboSC nl 36 132 71 1
Fig.5. Illustrationofthelearnableverbalizer.Thelogitsaretransformedinto IC FluentSC en 24 115 61 3
labelsforthedownstreamtaskthroughalineartransformation.Furthermore, SD Mustard++ en 2 229 128 1
theoriginalvocabularyembeddingsareconvertedintoclass-specificembed-
dings using weighted transformations, aligning them more closely with the AcC AccentDB en 9 205 91 1
downstreamtask. en,es,
LID Voxforge fr,de, 6 392 231 1
ru, it
introduce a learnable verbalizer coupled with a novel input GoogleSCv2/ en/
VAD 2 31 16 1
transformation (Fig. 5) that aligns the discrete units with the FreeSound audio
downstream task labels more meaningfully. In a learnable SequenceGeneration
verbalizer, the mappings are determined by a learnable linear ASR LibriSpeech en 28 591 355 172
transformation matrix W ∈ R|Y|×|V|, where |V| is the size
PR LibriSpeech en 71 591 355 116
of the original LM’s vocabulary, and |Y| is the number of
SF AudioSNIPS en 107 142 96 53
classes in the downstream task. This matrix is applied to the
logits vector z ∈ R|V|×1 to produce a transformed logits SpeechGeneration
t
vector zˆ ∈R|Y|×1 over the downstream task labels: ST CoVoST2 en,es |V| 305 167 120
t
SC LJSpeech en,es |V| 328 199 199
zˆ =W ·z (9)
t t
Following this transformation, the label y is sampled from task. The process effectively creates class-specific embed-
t
the transformed logits: dings by aggregating the original embeddings, each weighted
according to the transformed softmax outputs. This method
y t =argmax P(y|zˆ t ), (10) not only preserves the intrinsic properties of the original
y
vocabularyembeddingsbutalsoalignsthemmorecloselywith
where P(y|zˆ) is the probability of class y given the trans- the target classes of the downstream task, thereby enhancing
t
formed logits zˆ at timestep t. the model’s adaptability and effectiveness in handling varied
t
To facilitate autoregressive processing and incorporate the speech processing applications.
predicted downstream tasks’ labels as input to the unit LM, The learnable verbalizer offers improved explainability,
we propose an input transformation mechanism, which is effectively utilizing the information in the discrete units,
coupled with the learnable verbalizer matrix W. This mecha- which will be discussed in Sec. V-C. Meanwhile, it preserves
nism transforms the original vocabulary embeddings into new parameter efficiency in the prompting paradigm. For instance,
embeddings suitable for the downstream task’s labels. intheASRtaskfeaturing28classesandaUnitmBARTmodel
Mathematically, the transformed embedding for a given with1,000units,theverbalizernecessitatesfewerthan30,000
class y, denoted as eˆ(y), is computed as a weighted sum of learnable parameters.
the original vocabulary embeddings e. Let W denote the
y:
y-th row of the matrix W, where the i-th element in W
IV. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
y:
represents the learned weight of the i-th unit contributing to Inthiswork,wecomparethe“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigm
the class y. W is then input into the softmax function with with the prompting paradigm for speech processing across
y:
the temperature parameter τ, transforming the weights into three types of tasks: (1) speech classification tasks, (2) se-
probabilities. The formula is expressed as: quence generation tasks, and (3) speech generation tasks. The
useddatasetandthebasicstatisticsarepresentedinTable IV.
|V| (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
eˆ(y)= (cid:88) softmax W τ y: ·e(u i ) (11) A. Tasks and Datasets
i=1 i 1) Speech Classification Tasks:
In this formulation, eˆ(y) signifies the newly generated em- Speech Command Recognition (SCR): The task is to rec-
beddingforclassy,tailoredtothedemandsofthedownstream ognize which keyword is presented in a given utterance. We
8
adopted the Google Speech Commands dataset [56] and low- BLEU with sacrebleu 5. We perform Mean Opinion Score
resource datasets in different languages. These include Grabo (MOS) prediction with TorchAudio-Squim [70] to assess the
SpeechCommands(Grabo-SC)[57],LithuanianSpeechCom- naturalness of the generated speech 6.
mands (LT-SC) [58], Dysarthric Mandarin Speech Commands Speech Continuation (SC): SC aims to generate coherent
(DM-SC) [59], and Arabic Speech Commands (AR-SC) [60]. continuation of a given speech input while preserving the
Intent Classification (IC): This task classifies utterances into semantic context. In the experiment, we adopt LJSpeech [71],
predefined classes to determine the intent of speakers. We which contains approximately 24 hours of English speech
used the Fluent Speech Commands dataset [61], where each from a single speaker. We divided the LJSpeech dataset into
utterance has three labels: action, object, and location. training, validation, and testing subsets. Within these subsets,
SarcasmDetection(SD):Thistaskaimstodetermineifanut- we designated each utterance’s initial r fraction as the seed
teranceissarcastic.WeemployedtheMustard++dataset[62]. segment for the speech continuation tasks. We refer to the
Accent Classification (AcC): This task involves classifying value of r as the conditional ratio. Given this seed segment,
accents within the same language. We utilized the AccentDB our model aims to generate a coherent continuation of the
Dataset[63],whichincludesfourIndian-Englishaccents,four speech.FollowingST,thegeneratedspeechisfirsttranscribed
native English accents, and one metropolitan Indian-English intotext,afterwhichPerplexity(PPX)7 andAuto-BLEU[18]
accent. are evaluated. We report MOS prediction results to assess the
Language Identification (LID): The objective of this task naturalness of the speech and evaluate the speaker similarity
is to recognize the language present in a given utterance. We (SIM) between the seed segment and the generated speech.
utilizedtheVoxforgeDataset[64],whichcomprisesutterances SIM is obtained by computing the cosine similarity between
in six different languages.
speakerembeddings,derivedfromtheResemblyzerpackage8.
Voice Activity Detection (VAD): This task is to determine
whether a segment of an utterance contains human speech or B. Model and Training Setup
isjustbackgroundnoiseorsilence.FollowingMarbleNet[65], We compare the “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm with the
weusedGoogleSpeechCommandsv2[56]asspeechdataand prompting paradigm to assess whether prompting can achieve
FreeSound dataset [66] as background noise data. We refer to competitive performance while also providing parameter effi-
this mixed dataset as GFSound. ciency and other associated benefits as discussed in Table. I.
The evaluation metric for speech classification tasks men- 1) Prompting Paradigm: We explore two types of speech
tioned above is accuracy. LMswithinthepromptingparadigm:thedecoder-onlyGener-
2) Sequence Generation Tasks: ative Spoken Language Model (GSLM) [18] and the encoder-
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR): The task is to tran- decoder model Unit mBART [20]. GSLM is pre-trained using
scribe an utterance into text (character sequence). We utilized a next token prediction task on discrete units obtained by
the LibriSpeech [67] train-clean-100 dataset for training and quantizing the 6-th layer of HuBERT representations into 100
the test-clean dataset for testing. The evaluation metrics are clusters. The GSLM paper [18] considered different settings,
word error rate (WER) and character error rate (CER). including various SSL models and cluster numbers. This set-
PhonemeRecognition(PR):Thetaskinvolvestranscribingan tingisselectedforitssuperiorperformance.GSLMconsistsof
utterance into a phoneme sequence. We utilized LibriSpeech 12 Transformer-decoder layers, each with 16 attention heads,
train-clean-100andtest-cleandatasetsfortrainingandtesting. anembeddingsizeof1024,andafeedforwardnetwork(FFN)
The evaluation metric is phoneme error rate (PER). size of 4096, totaling 150 million parameters. It is pre-trained
Slot Filling (SF): In the slot filling task, models are expected on HuBERT discrete units derived from a clean 6k-hour sub-
not only to recognize the spoken content but also to decode sample of the Libri-Light dataset [72]. On the other hand,
the associated slot type. Specifically, the slot type is decoded Unit mBART is pre-trained on a multilingual denoising task
in conjunction with the transcription in a sequence generation usingdiscreteunitsderivedfromquantizingthe11-thlayerof
approach. We adopted AudioSNIPS dataset [68] and the mHuBERT representations into 1,000 clusters. Unit mBART
evaluationmetricsarecharactererrorrate(CER)andF1score. includes 12 Transformer-encoder layers and 12 Transformer-
decoder layers, each with an embedding size of 1024, an
3) Speech Generation Tasks: FFN dimension of 4096, and 16 attention heads, totaling
Speech Translation (ST): ST is the process of converting 353 million parameters. The embedding tables of the encoder
speech signals from the source language into speech in the and decoder share the same parameters. Unit mBART is pre-
target language, enabling communication between individuals trained on mHuBERT discrete units obtained from VoxPopuli
who speak different languages. We utilize the CoVoST2 [69] with 16k hours for Spanish, 14k hours for English, and Libri-
Es-En dataset. This dataset comprises parallel text data for Light with 60k hours for English.
Spanish (Es) and English (En) translations. Following [20],
we utilize a single-speaker TTS system 3 to synthesize the 5https://github.com/mjpost/sacrebleu
speechofthetargetlanguage.Weutilizeanoff-the-shelfASR 6TorchAudio-Squimutilizesnon-matchingreference(NMR)forMOSpre-
system 4 to transcribe the generated speech and calculate the diction.Forassessingeachutterance,werandomlysampleonecleanspeech
fromtheoriginaldatasetasthereference.
7Evaluated with a pre-trained LM, “transformer lm.wmt19.en”, available
3https://huggingface.co/espnet/kan-bayashi ljspeech vits onFairseq.
4“Wav2vec2 large lv60k”withCTCdecoderavailableonPyTorch 8https://github.com/resemble-ai/Resemblyzer
9
TABLEV
PERFORMANCECOMPARISONONSPEECHCLASSIFICATIONTASKSFORTHE“PRE-TRAIN,FINE-TUNEPARADIGM”(FT)ANDTHE“PROMPTING
PARADIGM”(PT).THEEVALUATIONMETRICISACCURACY.HuBERT+ExpertANDmHuBERT+Expert:BUILDINGANEXPERTDOWNSTREAM
MODELONTOPOFTHESSLSPEECHMODELANDFINE-TUNINGTHEEXPERTMODEL.GSLMfixedANDUnitmBARTfixed:PROMPTINGTHESPEECH
LANGUAGEMODELWITHAFIXEDVERBALIZER.GSLMlearnANDUnitmBARTlearn:PROMPTINGTHESPEECHLMWITHALEARNABLEVERBALIZER.IN
THEPTSCENARIOS,AROUND0.15MTRAINABLEPARAMETERSAREINCLUDED;WHILEFTADOPTSAROUND0.2MPARAMETERS.
SpeechClassificationTasks(fulldatasetsetting)
SCR IC SD AcC LID VAD
Paradigm Scenario
Google-SC AR-SC LT-SC DM-SC Grabo-SC FluentSC Mustard++ AccentDB Voxforge GFSound
FT HuBERT+Expert 94.88 98.38 92.86 52.14 91.44 93.18 61.72 99.53 97.73 98.55
PT
GSLMfixed 94.50 99.70 93.20 74.30 92.40 98.76 63.33 78.90 90.90 96.60
GSLMlearn 94.71 99.19 92.86 74.36 95.76 98.58 65.83 80.02 87.69 97.01
FT mHuBERT+Expert 93.59 99.46 91.84 64.96 89.92 93.57 60.42 93.78 98.23 98.40
PT
UnitmBARTfixed 93.99 96.22 91.84 64.96 97.11 97.81 63.33 88.71 98.81 97.26
UnitmBARTlearn 94.45 99.73 91.84 77.78 95.07 97.81 63.33 87.38 98.13 97.43
In our experiments, we set the prompt length l = 5 for derives the discrete units for the expert downstream model.
GSLM on speech classification tasks and l = 3 for Unit [37] indicates that using the SSL speech representation as
mBART. In sequence generation tasks, the prompt lengths are input is a strong baseline compared to using discrete units
l = 180 for GSLM and l = 50 for Unit mBART. For speech as input. Both HuBERT and mHuBERT adopt the HuBERT-
generation tasks, we adopt a prompt length of l = 200 for base architecture [29], containing 12 Transformer layers with
Unit mBART and a prompt length of l = 180 for GSLM. 95 million parameters.
The prompt length is a hyperparameter that can be adjusted For the expert downstream model’s design, we follow SU-
for different numbers of trainable parameters. Since the ar- PERB[2]andadjustthehiddendimensionofthedownstream
chitecture of both models is different, the positions in which model to achieve a lightweight expert model to compare with
the prompts can be inserted differ; notably, Unit mBART has the prompting paradigm. For speech classification tasks, we
an extra encoder for this purpose. Consequently, we have employ a linear model with a cross-entropy loss function.
employeddifferentpromptlengthsforthetwomodelswiththe Weutilizea2-layerLSTMwithahiddendimensionof256
aimofachievingcompetitiveperformancewhilemaintaininga for sequence generation tasks 9, and a 2-layer Transformer
comparable number of trainable parameters to compare with withanembeddingsizeof512and8attentionheadsforspeech
the “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm. Specifically, for GSLM generation tasks. For speech classification tasks, we adopted
in sequence and speech generation tasks, we used a prompt theAdamoptimizerwithalearningrateof5e-3.Forsequence
length of 180, which was determined to provide effective generation tasks, we use the Adam optimizer with a learning
results based on the previous study [16]. Conversely, for Unit rate of 1e-2 for phoneme recognition and 1e-4 for ASR. For
mBART, we aimed to showcase its parameter efficiency in speech generation tasks, we use the Adam optimizer with a
speechclassificationandsequencegenerationtasks,aswellas learning rate of 5e-4 for 10 epochs.
demonstrate feasibility in speech generation tasks. Therefore,
we adopted specific prompt lengths accordingly.
V. RESULTS
We used random mapping for the fixed verbalizer. We
A. Main Results
adopt random mapping instead of a heuristic frequency-based
approach [16] for two reasons: (1) In the preliminary study, 1) Speech Classification Tasks: The comparison of the
wedonotobservesignificantperformanceimprovementwhen prompting paradigm (PT) and the “pre-train, fine-tune”
utilizing the heuristic method. (2) In the few-shot learning paradigm (FT) for the speech classification tasks are shown
scenario, the statistics of the discrete units are inadequate. in Table V. Our results indicate that the prompting method
For the learnable verbalizer, we set the softmax’s temperature generally delivers competitive performance and often outper-
τ =0.01 in the input transformation. formsthefine-tuningapproach.Specifically,forHuBERTand
For prompt tuning in each task, the prompt vectors are GSLM models, prompting outperforms fine-tuning in 6 out
randomly initialized. We use the Adam optimizer with β of 10 datasets (AR-SC, LT-SC, DM-SC, Grabo-SC, Fluent-
parameters set to (0.9, 0.98) and a learning rate of 5e-3. SC, and Mustard++). For mHuBERT and mBART, prompting
An early stopping mechanism is adopted to prevent over- excels in 8 out of 10 datasets, including all datasets under
fitting. Additionally, the speech LM conducts autoregressive SCR (with LT-SC achieving identical performance), IC, SD,
generation throughout inference across all tasks. Beam search and LID.
algorithmwithabeamsizeof5isadoptedduringthesampling Forthefewtasks wherepromptingisslightlyoutperformed
process. by fine-tuning in HuBERT and GSLM settings (Google-SC,
and GFSound), the performance gap is minimal, within a
2) Pre-train, Fine-tune Paradigm: In the “pre-train, fine-
tune”paradigm,wetrainanexpertdownstreammodelforeach
9In the SUPERB setting, phoneme recognition utilizes CTC loss and a
task, utilizing the SSL speech representation as inputs. We
lineardownstreammodelforframe-wiseprediction.FollowingSUPERB,we
adopt the same layer of the intermediate representation that alsoemployalinearmodelforthe“pre-train,fine-tune”paradigm.
10
TABLEVI
PERFORMANCECOMPARISONONSEQUENCEGENERATIONTASKSFORTHE“PRE-TRAIN,FINE-TUNEPARADIGM”(FT)ANDTHE“PROMPTING
PARADIGM”(PT).*:THELEARNABLEVERBALIZERINTRODUCESANEXTRASMALLNUMBEROFPARAMETERS,WHICHISNEGLIGIBLEHERE.
Sequence Generation Tasks
ASR-LibriSpeech PR-LibriSpeech SF-AudioSnips
Paradigm Scenario
# Params. WER ↓ CER ↓ # Params. PER ↓ # Params. CER ↓ F1 ↑
FT HuBERT + Expert 2.9M 15.67 4.55 2.6M 5.34 2.9M 40.08 78.53
PT GSLM 4.5M 34.17 26.14 4.5M 21.10 4.5M 66.90 59.47
fixed
FT mHuBERT + Expert 2.9M 14.44 4.43 2.6M 12.42 2.9M 32.24 85.26
Unit mBART 2.6M 13.85 5.91 2.6M 5.16 2.6M 33.09 87.20
PT fixed
Unit mBART 2.6M* 11.56 5.13 2.6M* 4.95 2.6M* 30.69 87.08
learn
TABLEVII
EVALUATIONFORTHESPEECHCONTINUATIONTASK.BOTHGSLMANDUnitmBARTAREINTHEPROMPTINGPARADIGM.ORIGINAL:THEGROUND
TRUTHCORPUSINTHEDATASET.r:CONDITIONALRATE.ABBREVIATIONS:PPX(PERPLEXITY),AB1(AUTO-BLEU-1),AB2(AUTO-BLEU-2),MOS
(MEANOPINIONSCORE),SIM(SPEAKERSIMILARITY).
SpeechGenerationTask(SpeechContinuation)
r=0.25 r=0.5 r=0.75
Scenario
PPX(↓) AB1 AB2 MOS(↑) SIM(↑) PPX(↓) AB1 AB2 MOS(↑) SIM(↑) PPX(↓) AB1 AB2 MOS(↑) SIM(↑)
GSLM 422.62 21.58 8.80 3.88 0.72 341.30 20.43 7.76 3.87 0.76 282.26 18.57 6.98 3.87 0.78
UnitmBART 543.80 14.20 1.51 4.45 0.78 420.49 13.84 1.60 4.45 0.85 283.03 14.09 2.41 4.45 0.88
Original 202.92 13.9 2.42 4.47 0.86 202.92 13.9 2.42 4.47 0.95 202.92 13.9 2.42 4.47 0.98
TABLEVIII still underperforms compared to the fine-tuning paradigm by
EVALUATIONONSPANISHTOENGLISHSPEECH-TO-SPEECH a substantial margin. The reasons are discussed in previous
TRANSLATION.
work[16],includingthatquantizingspeechintodiscreteunits
results in longer sequences, which might be difficult for a
SpeechGenerationTask(SpeechTranslation)
decoder model to handle. In our preliminary study, even
Paradigm Scenario BLEU(↑) MOS(↑) #Params.
FT mHuBERT+Expert × utilizing a learnable verbalizer for prompting GSLM does not
PT GSLM × show performance improvement.
PT UnitmBART 15.89 4.32 10M
On the other hand, surprisingly, prompting an encoder-
FT UnitmBART 18.47 4.33 353M
decoder model like Unit mBART can achieve competitive
performance, outperforming the fine-tuning paradigm in most
scenarios, except for the metric CER in ASR, which falls
2%difference.However,fine-tuningdemonstratesanoticeable
behind by 0.7. Furthermore, we can observe the effectiveness
advantageintaskslikeAcCandLID.Thiscouldbeattributed
of introducing a learnable verbalizer in Unit mBART. For
to the loss of certain information, such as prosody, in the
every metric other than the F1 score in Slot Filling (SF),
quantized HuBERT discrete units, leading to inferior GSLM
there is a substantial improvement when comparing Unit
performance compared to HuBERT with the downstream
mBART with Unit mBART . The analysis of the learn-
expert model. In the mHuBERT and Unit mBART settings, learn fixed
ableverbalizerwillbediscussedinSectionV-C.FromGSLM
while fine-tuning outperformed in 2 tasks, the performance
to Unit mBART, the speech LM becomes better, and tasks
difference in VAD is marginal (about 1.2%).
thatpreviouslyyieldedpoorresultswithGSLMcannowyield
When assessing the effectiveness of utilizing a learnable
favorable outcomes with Unit mBART. We anticipate that in
verbalizer compared to a fixed one for prompting, it’s ob-
the future, with more advanced speech LMs emerging, further
served that for GSLM, performance is enhanced in 6 out
performance improvement can be seen with the proposed
of 10 datasets (Google-SC, DM-SC, Grabo-SC, Mustard++,
prompting framework.
AccentDB,andGFSound).ForunitmBART,theperformances 3) Speech Generation Tasks: In speech generation tasks,
haveimprovedorareonparin7datasets(Google-SC,AR-SC,
we focus on two tasks: Speech Translation (ST) and Speech
LT-SC, DM-SC, Fluent-SC, Mustard++, and GFSound).
Continuation (SC). Our experiments show the effectiveness
Insummary,thepromptingmethodsgreatlymatchorexceed of prompting Unit mBART for speech translation, as detailed
the performance of the fine-tuning approach across most in Table VIII. Speech-to-speech translation poses significant
speech classification tasks (6 outperform and 3 comparable challenges, often requiring incorporating auxiliary tasks [73],
for HuBERT and GSLM; 8 outperform and 1 comparable for [74]oradoptinganadvancedspeechLM[20].Ourresultsalso
mHuBERT and unit BART), except in accent classification. supportthisobservation:neitherthepromptingGSLMbaseline
2) Sequence Generation Tasks: The experiment results of nor the fine-tuning baseline with an expertly built mHuBERT
sequence generation tasks are shown in Table VI. In sequence model yielded reasonable results. We experimented with var-
generation tasks, we observe that although prompting the ious learning rates and downstream expert models; however,
decoder-only model GSLM can yield non-trivial results, it the fine-tuning baseline still yielded unsatisfactory outcomes.
11
TABLEIX
PERFORMANCECOMPARISONONSPEECHCLASSIFICATIONTASKSWITHLOWRESOURCEDATASETSETTING(10-SHOT)FORTHE“PRE-TRAIN,FINE-TUNE
PARADIGM”(FT)ANDTHE“PROMPTINGPARADIGM”(PT).THEEVALUATIONMETRICISACCURACY.
SpeechClassificationTasks(10-shotsetting)
SCR IC SD AcC LID VAD
Paradigm Scenario
Google-SC AR-SC LT-SC DM-SC Grabo-SC Fluent-SC Mustard++ AccentDB Voxforge GFSound
FT HuBERT+Expert 75.33 68.65 80.61 50.42 43.55 47.04 54.17 78.71 56.69 92.85
PT
GSLMfixed 79.55 42.16 79.59 62.39 49.23 73.5 55.83 22.35 32.16 87.1
GSLMlearn 77.15 90.00 68.36 61.50 86.50 72.87 65.83 26.71 85.41 89.30
FT mHuBERT+Expert 76.88 94.59 72.45 47.01 76.24 47.01 56.77 50.96 90.65 95.97
PT
UnitmBARTfixed 81.47 95.14 78.57 70.85 87.10 55.81 63.33 49.23 94.46 95.21
UnitmBARTlearn 80.46 93.51 86.74 64.96 85.85 64.90 53.33 57.32 93.83 92.84
On the other hand, prompting Unit mBART demonstrates paradigm (FT) in most speech classification tasks. For Hu-
proficiency in producing reasonable translations, as evidenced BERT and GSLM, the FT method can only outperform the
by its BLEU score. Compared to fine-tuning the whole Unit PT in 3 out of 10 tasks (LT-SC, AccentDB, GFSound).
mBART, the prompting method has a performance drop but Meanwhile, for mHuBERT and Unit mBART, the FT method
shows promising trainable parameter efficiency. Examples of can only outperform the PT in 1 out of 10 tasks (GFSound).
thespeechgenerationtaskscanbefoundonthedemopage10. Generally, in speech classification tasks under few-shot
Similarly, in speech continuation tasks, the SSL speech scenarios, prompting with Unit mBART achieves the best
models (HuBERT and mHuBERT) paired with expert models overall performance, showing top or near-top results in most
did not produce reasonable results. As shown in Table VII, tasks. Interestingly, we do not observe consistent performance
for various conditional ratios r, we observed that prompting improvement when utilizing a learnable verbalizer in these
GSLM outperformed Unit mBART in terms of Perplexity few-shot scenarios. We hypothesize that this might be due to
(PPX), aligning with GSLM’s pre-training for such tasks. the limited data, which causes challenges for the learnable
RegardingtheAuto-BLEUmetric[18],UnitmBARTachieved verbalizertoextractthehiddeninformationencapsulatedinthe
scores comparable to the original utterances in the LJ Speech discrete units effectively. The investigation of the underlying
dataset. This suggests that the utterances generated by Unit reason remains a future work.
mBART are as diverse as the oracle utterances, a challenge
where GSLM falls behind. Future research will explore vary-
C. Verbalizer Analysis
ing the sampling temperature to enhance utterance generation
quality, as discussed in [18]. For speech quality, both GSLM In this study, we introduce an optional learnable verbalizer
and Unit mBART exhibit comparable MOS and speaker sim- thatbridgesthegapbetweendiscreteunitsandthedownstream
ilarity to the original LJ Speech utterances 11. tasks’ labels. Prior research has shown that discrete units
encapsulate acoustic and phonetic information [18], [75].
Thus,ratherthanemployingarandommappingoftheheuristic
B. Few-shot Learning
method in ASR and PR, it is more reasonable to employ a
Thepromptingmethodhasdemonstrateditsfew-shotlearn-
learnableverbalizerthatdiscernswhichdiscreteunitscorrelate
ing capabilities in the NLP field [5], [9] because of the inher-
with specific labels, such as characters or phonemes. The
ent rich prior knowledge within language models. Similarly,
efficacyofthelearnableverbalizerispresentedinFig.6.This
speech LMs have already learned to comprehend discretized
figure demonstrates the capability of the learnable verbalizer
speech,thatis,thediscretespeechunits.Thisstudyextendsthe
in linking discrete units with characters for the ASR task, as
investigationintothefew-shotlearningabilitiesoftheprompt-
displayed in the figure’s first row, and with phonemes for the
ing method for speech LMs. We conduct 10-shot learning
PRtask,asillustratedinthesecondrow.Theheatmapsdisplay
experiments.ForbothPTandFT,thetrainableparametersare
the weights W from the learnable verbalizer in Euqation 9,
updatedwiththeprovidedfew-shottrainingdata.Specifically,
with each map’s right side indicating the connected discrete
10 samples per class were used as training data. The models
unit.Besidestheunits,thetopthreephonemeswiththehighest
are evaluated using the same testing set as the full dataset
correlation to the discrete units are listed, as determined by
setting.
forced alignment. We observe that for a particular character,
Table IX illustrates the performance of the prompting
such as “B,” the verbalizer prefers discrete units with a strong
method in comparison to the “pre-train, fine-tune” paradigm
associationwiththephoneme“B.”Thispatternisconsistentin
in a 10-shot learning scenario. The experiment shows that
the second row, which pertains to phoneme recognition tasks.
thepromptingparadigm(PT)possessesrobustfew-shotlearn-
Here,labelsareconnectedtounitswithahighcorrespondence
ing capabilities and generally outperforms the fine-tuning
to the relevant phonemes.
10Demopage:https://ga642381.github.io/SpeechPrompt/speechgen
11Notethatthequalityofthegeneratedspeechisprimarilycontrolledby VI. DISCUSSION
thespeechdecoder,andhighspeakersimilaritycanberootedinthefactthat
thepre-trainingdataofthespeechdecoderincludesLJSpeech. We list observations, limitations, and future directions:
12
CharacterDiscrete unit and its
top 3 related phonemes
Learnable verbalizer's weight
Phoneme
Fig.6. AnalysisoftheLearnableVerbalizer.ThetoprowpresentsheatmapsfortheASRtask,witheachsubplotdedicatedtotheanalysisofanindividual
character.ThebottomrowrelatestothePhonemeRecognition(PR)task,witheachsubplotfocusedonaparticularphoneme.Theheatmapsshowtheweights
thatthelearnableverbalizerassignstothediscreteunits;forexample,thephoneme“AE1”ismoststronglylinkedto“Unit463”.Besidestheunits,thetop
threephonemeswiththehighestcorrelationtothediscreteunitsarelisted,whichisdeterminedbyforcedalignment.Thisvisualizationillustratesthelearnable
verbalizer’s ability to effectively utilize the information encoded in the discrete units to map to suitable labels. Related phonemes to the downstream tasks
labelsarecircled.
Architecture and Pre-training Task of Speech Language TABLEX
Models: In the field of NLP, there is a growing trend to- SEQUENCEGENERATIONTASKPERFORMANCE.THEMODELSARE
ORDEREDBASEDONTHEASRPERFORMANCE.
wards employing decoder-only language models, particularly
GPT variants, for a broad range of text generation tasks.
Model ASR(WER↓) SF(CER↓) SF(F1↑) #params
However, based on the experimental results, we suggest that
FBANK 23.18 52.94 69.64 43M
encoder-decoder models may offer distinct advantages for modifiedCPC 20.18 49.91 71.19 43M
TERA 18.17 54.17 67.5 43M
speech processing. We hypothesize that it is because many
vq-wav2vec 17.71 41.54 77.68 43M
speech processing tasks require handling different modalities, wav2vec 15.86 43.71 76.37 43M
DeCoAR2.0 13.02 34.73 83.28 43M
especially the speech signal and text. The unique continuous
UnitmBARTlearn 11.56 30.69 87.08 2.89M
characteristics of speech signals may be more effectively wav2vec2.0Base 6.43 24.77 88.3 43M
HuBERTBase 6.42 25.2 88.53 43M
processed by an encoder. Therefore, encoder-decoder models
WavLMBase 6.21 22.86 89.38 43M
are likely better suited for the first encoding of the speech data2vecLarge 3.36 22.16 90.98 43M
signal into a compact representation, after which the decoder
generates the desired output, whether it is a class label, example,thesettinginvolvesperformingaweightedsumover
text, or another speech signal. This observation aligns with the representations of each layer of SSL speech models and
recentwork[76]comparingGSLMandWav2Seq[77]models building an expert model on top of this, along with adopting
of similar sizes and datasets. The encoder-decoder model a customized loss for the downstream task. Although such a
Wav2Seq demonstrates an advantage. setting requires considerable human labor and computational
However, it is important to note that the pre-training tasks resources, its performance is competitive. In Table. X, we list
ofthesemodelsmayalsoplayasignificantroleintheirperfor- the ranking of the prompted Unit mBART for the ASR task
mance. For instance, GSLM, which performs the next-token and compare it with the SSL speech models on SUPERB.
prediction task during pre-training, achieves promising results DevelopAdvancedSpeechLanguagemodels:Speechlan-
for the speech continuation task. Conversely, Unit mBART’s guage models are currently in their nascent stage of develop-
pre-training task focuses on denoising, which may contribute ment compared to text-based language models. The proposed
to its superior performance in other speech processing tasks. prompt framework, although effective in motivating speech
The exploration of model architectures and their respective LMs, may not achieve exceptional performance. However,
pre-trainingtasksremainsaninterestingandvaluabledirection with advancements in speech LMs, such as the transition
for future research in the prompting paradigm. from GSLM to Unit mBART, there has been a significant
Performance of Prompting Speech Language Models: improvement in prompt performance. Particularly, tasks that
Wehaveobservedthecompetitiveperformanceoftheprompt- were previously challenging for GSLM now exhibit improved
ing Unit mBART model in both speech classification and performance with Unit mBART. We anticipate the emergence
generation tasks. Notably, in speech generation tasks, relying of even more promising speech LMs in the future.
solely on an SSL speech model does not yield satisfactory Moreover, this paper primarily focuses on textless speech
performance. However, a discernible performance gap still LMs,wherethemodeladaptstovarioustasksthroughprompt
exists between the prompting and fine-tuning paradigms, es- optimization. Achieving true 0-shot inference remains a chal-
pecially the sequence generation task. Taking SUPERB as an lenging but compelling goal within the field of speech pro-
13
cessing. Recent advances, such as instruction-tuned speech [5] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neubig, “Pre-
LMs [78]–[80], although they might be restricted to a specific train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods
innaturallanguageprocessing,”ACMComputingSurveys,vol.55,no.9,
languagewithwrittentext,highlightpromisingavenuestoward
pp.1–35,2023.
achieving 0-shot adaptation by guiding the LMs with text [6] T.Shin,Y.Razeghi,R.L.L.IV,E.Wallace,andS.Singh,“AutoPrompt:
instructions. Elicitingknowledgefromlanguagemodelswithautomaticallygenerated
prompts,”inProceedingsofthe2020ConferenceonEmpiricalMethods
Beyond Content Information: Current speech LMs do
inNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),2020,pp.4222–4235.
not fully capture speaker and emotion information, posing [7] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
a challenge for tasks beyond content-related aspects. In sce- Y.Zhou,W.Li,andP.J.Liu,“Exploringthelimitsoftransferlearning
with a unified text-to-text transformer,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21,
narios where preserving speaker and emotion information is
pp.140:1–140:67,2020.
possible, we plan to explore the integration of plug-and-
[8] T.SchickandH.Schu¨tze,“It’snotjustsizethatmatters:Smalllanguage
play modules specifically designed to incorporate speaker models are also few-shot learners,” in NAACL-HLT. Association for
and emotion details into the framework. Looking ahead, we ComputationalLinguistics,2021,pp.2339–2352.
[9] T. Schick and H. Schu¨tze, “Exploiting cloze-questions for few-shot
anticipatethatfuturespeechLMswillincorporateandleverage
text classification and natural language inference,” in Proceedings of
theseadditionalfactorsandbetterhandlespeakerandemotion- the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
related aspects in speech generation tasks. Google’s latest ComputationalLinguistics:MainVolume,2021,pp.255–269.
[10] S.Hu,N.Ding,H.Wang,Z.Liu,J.Wang,J.Li,W.Wu,andM.Sun,
speech LM [44] tries to include such information.
“Knowledgeable prompt-tuning: Incorporating knowledge into prompt
verbalizer for text classification,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual
VII. CONCLUSION
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
In this paper, we investigate how prompting can leverage LongPapers),2022,pp.2225–2240.
[11] N. Ding, Y. Qin, G. Yang, F. Wei, Z. Yang, Y. Su, S. Hu, Y. Chen,
the generative capabilities of speech language models (speech
C.-M. Chan, W. Chen et al., “Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large-
LMs)forsolvingawiderangeofspeechprocessingtasks.Our scalepre-trainedlanguagemodels,”NatureMachineIntelligence,vol.5,
approach includes minimal trainable parameters to guide the no.3,pp.220–235,2023.
speechLMswithinaunifiedframework,achievingcompetitive [12] X.L.LiandP.Liang,“Prefix-Tuning:Optimizingcontinuousprompts
for generation,” in Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
performance compared to the fine-tuning paradigm while
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
keepingthebenefitsofthepromptingparadigm.Theproposed Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
framework exhibits several desirable characteristics, including Papers),2021,pp.4582–4597.
[13] X.Liu,Y.Zheng,Z.Du,M.Ding,Y.Qian,Z.Yang,andJ.Tang,“GPT
its textless nature, versatility, efficiency, transferability, and
understands,too,”AIOpen,2023.
affordability. To demonstrate our framework’s capabilities, [14] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale for
we study the decoder-only GSLM and encoder-decoder Unit parameter-efficientprompttuning,”inProceedingsofthe2021Confer-
enceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),
mBART as case studies. We conduct experiments on three
2021,pp.3045–3059.
distinct types of speech processing tasks: speech classifica- [15] M. Jia, L. Tang, B.-C. Chen, C. Cardie, S. Belongie, B. Hariharan,
tion, sequence generation, and speech generation. Also, the and S.-N. Lim, “Visual prompt tuning,” in European Conference on
ComputerVision. Springer,2022,pp.709–727.
proposed framework shows promising results in the few-
[16] K.-W. Chang, W.-C. Tseng, S.-W. Li, and H. yi Lee, “An Exploration
shot scenario. We observe a trend that as more advanced of Prompt Tuning on Generative Spoken Language Model for Speech
speech LMs are developed, the performance of prompting ProcessingTasks,”inProc.Interspeech2022,2022,pp.5005–5009.
[17] T.Sun,Y.Shao,H.Qian,X.Huang,andX.Qiu,“Black-boxtuningfor
willsignificantlyimprove.Wealsodiscussthelimitationsand
language-model-as-a-service,” in International Conference on Machine
futuredirectionsofpromptingspeechLMs.Withtheimminent Learning. PMLR,2022,pp.20841–20855.
arrival of advanced speech LMs, our unified framework holds [18] K. Lakhotia, E. Kharitonov, W.-N. Hsu, Y. Adi, A. Polyak, B. Bolte,
immense potential in terms of efficiency and effectiveness, T.-A. Nguyen, J. Copet, A. Baevski, A. Mohamed et al., “On gener-
ative spoken language modeling from raw audio,” Transactions of the
standing on the shoulders of giants. AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,vol.9,pp.1336–1354,2021.
[19] E. Kharitonov, A. Lee, A. Polyak, Y. Adi, J. Copet, K. Lakhotia,
REFERENCES
T. A. Nguyen, M. Riviere, A. Mohamed, E. Dupoux, and W.-N. Hsu,
[1] A. Mohamed, H.-y. Lee, L. Borgholt, J. D. Havtorn, J. Edin, C. Igel, “Text-free prosody-aware generative spoken language modeling,” in
K. Kirchhoff, S.-W. Li, K. Livescu, L. Maaløe et al., “Self-supervised Proceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforCompu-
speech representation learning: A review,” IEEE Journal of Selected tationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),S.Muresan,P.Nakov,and
TopicsinSignalProcessing,vol.16,no.6,pp.1179–1210,2022. A.Villavicencio,Eds. Dublin,Ireland:AssociationforComputational
[2] S. Yang, P. Chi, Y. Chuang, C. J. Lai, K. Lakhotia, Y. Y. Lin, A. T. Linguistics,May2022,pp.8666–8681.
Liu, J. Shi, X. Chang, G. Lin, T. Huang, W. Tseng, K. Lee, D. Liu, [20] S. Popuri, P.-J. Chen, C. Wang, J. Pino, Y. Adi, J. Gu, W.-N. Hsu,
Z. Huang, S. Dong, S. Li, S. Watanabe, A. Mohamed, and H. Lee, and A. Lee, “Enhanced direct speech-to-speech translation using self-
“SUPERB: speech processing universal performance benchmark,” in supervised pre-training and data augmentation,” in Proc. Interspeech
Proc.Interspeech2021,2021,pp.1194–1198. 2022,2022,pp.5195–5199.
[3] S. Evain, H. Nguyen, H. Le, M. Z. Boito, S. Mdhaffar, S. Alisamir, [21] A.Polyak,Y.Adi,J.Copet,E.Kharitonov,K.Lakhotia,W.Hsu,A.Mo-
Z. Tong, N. A. Tomashenko, M. Dinarelli, T. Parcollet, A. Allauzen, hamed,andE.Dupoux,“Speechresynthesisfromdiscretedisentangled
Y.Este`ve,B.Lecouteux,F.Portet,S.Rossato,F.Ringeval,D.Schwab, self-supervised representations,” in Proc. Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp.
andL.Besacier,“LeBenchmark:Areproducibleframeworkforassessing 3615–3619.
self-supervised representation learning from speech,” in Proc. Inter- [22] X.Chang,B.Yan,Y.Fujita,T.Maekaku,andS.Watanabe,“Exploration
speech2021,2021,pp.1439–1443. ofefficientend-to-endASRusingdiscretizedinputfromself-supervised
[4] H. Tsai, H. Chang, W. Huang, Z. Huang, K. Lakhotia, S. Yang, learning,”inProc.Interspeech2023,2023,pp.1399–1403.
S. Dong, A. T. Liu, C. Lai, J. Shi, X. Chang, P. Hall, H. Chen, [23] A.Nautsch,A.Jime´nez,A.Treiber,J.Kolberg,C.Jasserand,E.Kindt,
S.Li,S.Watanabe,A.Mohamed,andH.Lee,“SUPERB-SG:enhanced H. Delgado, M. Todisco, M. A. Hmani, A. Mtibaa et al., “Preserving
speech processing universal performance benchmark for semantic and privacy in speaker and speech characterisation,” Computer Speech &
generative capabilities,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of Language,vol.58,pp.441–480,2019.
theAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers), [24] A.Radford,K.Narasimhan,T.Salimans,I.Sutskeveretal.,“Improving
2022,pp.8479–8492. languageunderstandingbygenerativepre-training,”2018.
14
[25] M.Lewis,Y.Liu,N.Goyal,M.Ghazvininejad,A.Mohamed,O.Levy, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
V. Stoyanov, and L. Zettlemoyer, “BART: denoising sequence-to- vol.31,pp.2523–2533,2023.
sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and [43] M. Hassid, T. Remez, T. A. Nguyen, I. Gat, A. Conneau, F. Kreuk,
comprehension,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the J. Copet, A. De´fossez, G. Synnaeve, E. Dupoux, R. Schwartz, and
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2020,pp.7871–7880. Y. Adi, “Textually pretrained speech language models,” Advances in
[26] E. Dunbar, N. Hamilakis, and E. Dupoux, “Self-supervised language Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 63483–63501,
learning from raw audio: Lessons from the zero resource speech chal- 2023.
lenge,”IEEEJournalofSelectedTopicsinSignalProcessing,vol.16, [44] E.Nachmani,A.Levkovitch,R.Hirsch,J.Salazar,C.Asawaroengchai,
no.6,pp.1211–1226,2022. S. Mariooryad, E. Rivlin, R. Skerry-Ryan, and M. T. Ramanovich,
[27] T.A.Nguyen,B.Sagot,andE.Dupoux,“Arediscreteunitsnecessary “Spokenquestionansweringandspeechcontinuationusingspectrogram-
for spoken language modeling?” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in powered LLM,” in International Conference on Learning Representa-
SignalProcessing,vol.16,no.6,pp.1415–1423,2022. tions,2024.
[28] E. Kharitonov, J. Copet, K. Lakhotia, T. A. Nguyen, P. Tomasello, [45] H.Gao,J.Ni,K.Qian,Y.Zhang,S.Chang,andM.Hasegawa-Johnson,
A. Lee, A. Elkahky, W.-N. Hsu, A. Mohamed, E. Dupoux et al., “WavPrompt: Towards few-shot spoken language understanding with
“textless-lib: a library for textless spoken language processing,” in frozen language models,” in Proc. Interspeech 2022, 2022, pp. 2738–
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter 2742.
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language [46] P.Peng,B.Yan,S.Watanabe,andD.Harwath,“Promptingthehidden
Technologies:SystemDemonstrations,2022,pp.1–9. talentofweb-scalespeechmodelsforzero-shottaskgeneralization,”in
[29] W.-N.Hsu,B.Bolte,Y.-H.H.Tsai,K.Lakhotia,R.Salakhutdinov,and Proc.Interspeech2023,2023,pp.396–400.
A.Mohamed,“HuBERT:self-supervisedspeechrepresentationlearning [47] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
by masked prediction of hidden units,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-
Audio,Speech,andLanguageProcessing,vol.29,pp.3451–3460,2021. vision,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
[30] C.-C. Chiu, J. Qin, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, and Y. Wu, “Self-supervised 2023,pp.28492–28518.
learning with random-projection quantizer for speech recognition,” in [48] G.F.Elsayed,I.Goodfellow,andJ.Sohl-Dickstein,“Adversarialrepro-
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. grammingofneuralnetworks,”inInternationalConferenceonLearning
3915–3924. Representations,2019.
[31] M.Riviere,A.Joulin,P.-E.Mazare´,andE.Dupoux,“Unsupervisedpre- [49] P.-Y. Chen, “Model reprogramming: Resource-efficient cross-domain
trainingtransferswellacrosslanguages,”inICASSP2020-2020IEEE machinelearning,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing Intelligence,vol.38,no.20,2024,pp.22584–22591.
(ICASSP). IEEE,2020,pp.7414–7418. [50] C.-H. H. Yang, Y.-Y. Tsai, and P.-Y. Chen, “Voice2series: Reprogram-
[32] A.Baevski,Y.Zhou,A.Mohamed,andM.Auli,“wav2vec2.0:Aframe- ming acoustic models for time series classification,” in International
workforself-supervisedlearningofspeechrepresentations,”Advances ConferenceonMachineLearning. PMLR,2021,pp.11808–11819.
inNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.33,pp.12449–12460, [51] H. Yen, P.-J. Ku, C.-H. H. Yang, H. Hu, S. M. Siniscalchi, P.-Y.
2020. Chen, and Y. Tsao, “Neural model reprogramming with similarity
[33] D. Jiang, W. Li, M. Cao, W. Zou, and X. Li, “Speech SimCLR: basedmappingforlow-resourcespokencommandrecognition,”inProc.
Combining contrastive and reconstruction objective for self-supervised Interspeech2023,2023,pp.3317–3321.
speech representation learning,” in Proc. Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp. [52] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
1544–1548. Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
[34] Y.-A. Chung and J. Glass, “Generative pre-training for speech with NeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.30,2017.
autoregressive predictive coding,” in ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE In- [53] T.Schick,H.Schmid,andH.Schu¨tze,“Automaticallyidentifyingwords
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing thatcanserveaslabelsforfew-shottextclassification,”inProceedingsof
(ICASSP). IEEE,2020,pp.3497–3501. the28thInternationalConferenceonComputationalLinguistics,2020,
[35] S.LingandY.Liu,“DeCoAR2.0:Deepcontextualizedacousticrepre- pp.5569–5578.
sentations with vector quantization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06659, [54] S.Min,X.Lyu,A.Holtzman,M.Artetxe,M.Lewis,H.Hajishirzi,and
2020. L. Zettlemoyer, “Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes
[36] A.T.Liu,S.-W.Li,andH.-y.Lee,“TERA:Self-supervisedlearningof in-context learning work?” in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
transformerencoderrepresentationforspeech,”IEEE/ACMTransactions EmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,2022,pp.11048–
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 29, pp. 2351–2366, 11064.
2021. [55] G.Cui,S.Hu,N.Ding,L.Huang,andZ.Liu,“Prototypicalverbalizer
[37] X. Chang, B. Yan, K. Choi, J.-W. Jung, Y. Lu, S. Maiti, R. Sharma, for prompt-based few-shot tuning,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual
J.Shi,J.Tian,S.Watanabe,Y.Fujita,T.Maekaku,P.Guo,Y.-F.Cheng, Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
P. Denisov, K. Saijo, and H.-H. Wang, “Exploring speech recognition, LongPapers),2022,pp.7014–7024.
translation,andunderstandingwithdiscretespeechunits:Acomparative [56] P.Warden,“Speechcommands:Adatasetforlimited-vocabularyspeech
study,” in ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Conference on recognition,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1804.03209,2018.
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024, pp. [57] Y. Tian and P. J. Gorinski, “Improving end-to-end speech-to-intent
11481–11485. classification with reptile,” in Proc. Interspeech 2020, 2020, pp. 891–
[38] Y.Yang,F.Shen,C.Du,Z.Ma,K.Yu,D.Povey,andX.Chen,“Towards 895.
universal speech discrete tokens: A case study for ASR and TTS,” [58] A.KolesauandD.Sˇesˇok,“Unsupervisedpre-trainingforvoiceactiva-
in ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, tion,”AppliedSciences,vol.10,no.23,p.8643,2020.
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024, pp. 10401– [59] Y.-Y.Lin,W.-Z.Zheng,W.C.Chu,J.-Y.Han,Y.-H.Hung,G.-M.Ho,C.-
10405. Y.Chang,andY.-H.Lai,“Aspeechcommandcontrol-basedrecognition
[39] A.Radford,J.Wu,R.Child,D.Luan,D.Amodei,I.Sutskeveretal., system for dysarthric patients based on deep learning technology,”
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog, AppliedSciences,vol.11,no.6,p.2477,2021.
vol.1,no.8,p.9,2019. [60] L. T. Benamer and O. A. Alkishriwo, “Database for Arabic speech
[40] J.Shen,R.Pang,R.J.Weiss,M.Schuster,N.Jaitly,Z.Yang,Z.Chen, commandsrecognition,”inCEST,2020.
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Skerrv-Ryan et al., “Natural TTS synthesis by [61] L. Lugosch, M. Ravanelli, P. Ignoto, V. S. Tomar, and Y. Bengio,
conditioningwavenetonmelspectrogrampredictions,”inICASSP2018 “Speechmodelpre-trainingforend-to-endspokenlanguageunderstand-
-2018IEEEInternationalConferenceonAcoustics,SpeechandSignal ing,”inProc.Interspeech2019,G.KubinandZ.Kacic,Eds.,2019,pp.
Processing(ICASSP). IEEE,2018,pp.4779–4783. 814–818.
[41] J. Kong, J. Kim, and J. Bae, “HiFi-GAN: Generative adversarial [62] A. Ray, S. Mishra, A. Nunna, and P. Bhattacharyya, “A multimodal
networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis,” Advances corpus for emotion recognition in sarcasm,” in Proceedings of the
inNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.33,pp.17022–17033, ThirteenthLREC,2022,pp.6992–7003.
2020. [63] A.Ahamad,A.Anand,andP.Bhargava,“Accentdb:Adatabaseofnon-
[42] Z.Borsos,R.Marinier,D.Vincent,E.Kharitonov,O.Pietquin,M.Shar- nativeenglishaccentstoassistneuralspeechrecognition,”inProceed-
ifi,D.Roblek,O.Teboul,D.Grangier,M.Tagliasacchi,andN.Zeghi- ings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
dour,“AudioLM:Alanguagemodelingapproachtoaudiogeneration,” 2020,pp.5351–5358.
15
[64] K. MacLean, “Voxforge,” 2018, Ken MacLean.[Online]. Available:
http://www.voxforge.org/home.[Acedidoem2012].
[65] F. Jia, S. Majumdar, and B. Ginsburg, “MarbleNet: Deep 1d time-
channel separable convolutional neural network for voice activity de-
tection,” in ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2021, pp.
6818–6822.
[66] E. Fonseca, J. Pons, X. Favory, F. Font, D. Bogdanov, A. Ferraro,
S. Oramas, A. Porter, and X. Serra, “Freesound Datasets: A platform
forthecreationofopenaudiodatasets,”inISMIR,2017,pp.486–493.
[67] V.Panayotov,G.Chen,D.Povey,andS.Khudanpur,“Librispeech:An
ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in ICASSP 2015 -
2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing(ICASSP). IEEE,2015,pp.5206–5210.
[68] C. Lai, Y. Chuang, H. Lee, S. Li, and J. R. Glass, “Semi-supervised
spokenlanguageunderstandingviaself-supervisedspeechandlanguage
model pretraining,” in ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Con-
ferenceonAcoustics,SpeechandSignalProcessing(ICASSP). IEEE,
2021,pp.7468–7472.
[69] C. Wang, A. Wu, J. Gu, and J. Pino, “CoVoST 2 and massively
multilingual speech translation,” in Proc. Interspeech 2021, 2021, pp.
2247–2251.
[70] A. Kumar, K. Tan, Z. Ni, P. Manocha, X. Zhang, E. Henderson,
and B. Xu, “Torchaudio-squim: Reference-less speech quality and
intelligibility measures in torchaudio,” in ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE,2023,pp.1–5.
[71] K. Ito and L. Johnson, “The LJ speech dataset,” https://keithito.com/
LJ-Speech-Dataset/,2017.
[72] J. Kahn, M. Riviere, W. Zheng, E. Kharitonov, Q. Xu, P.-E. Mazare´,
J.Karadayi,V.Liptchinsky,R.Collobert,C.Fuegenetal.,“Libri-Light:
abenchmarkforasrwithlimitedornosupervision,”inICASSP2020-
2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing(ICASSP). IEEE,2020,pp.7669–7673.
[73] Y.Jia,R.J.Weiss,F.Biadsy,W.Macherey,M.Johnson,Z.Chen,and
Y.Wu,“Directspeech-to-speechtranslationwithasequence-to-sequence
model,”inProc.Interspeech2019,2019,pp.1123–1127.
[74] A.Lee,P.-J.Chen,C.Wang,J.Gu,S.Popuri,X.Ma,A.Polyak,Y.Adi,
Q.He,Y.Tangetal.,“Directspeech-to-speechtranslationwithdiscrete
units,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
forComputationalLinguistics,2022,pp.3327–3339.
[75] D. Wells, H. Tang, and K. Richmond, “Phonetic analysis of self-
supervisedrepresentationsofenglishspeech,”inProc.Interspeech2022,
2022,pp.3583–3587.
[76] K.-W. Chang, M.-H. Chen, Y.-P. Lin, J. N. Hsu, P. K.-M. Huang, C.-
y. Huang, S.-W. Li, and H.-y. Lee, “Prompting and adapter tuning for
self-supervisedencoder-decoderspeechmodel,”in2023IEEEAutomatic
SpeechRecognitionandUnderstandingWorkshop(ASRU). IEEE,2023,
pp.1–8.
[77] F. Wu, K. Kim, S. Watanabe, K. J. Han, R. McDonald, K. Q. Wein-
berger, and Y. Artzi, “Wav2Seq: pre-training speech-to-text encoder-
decodermodelsusingpseudolanguages,”inICASSP2023-2023IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE,2023,pp.1–5.
[78] C.-y. Huang, K.-H. Lu, S.-H. Wang, C.-Y. Hsiao, C.-Y. Kuan, H. Wu,
S.Arora,K.-W.Chang,J.Shi,Y.Pengetal.,“Dynamic-superb:Towards
a dynamic, collaborative, and comprehensive instruction-tuning bench-
markforspeech,”inICASSP2024-2024IEEEInternationalConference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024,
pp.12136–12140.
[79] Y. Gong, A. H. Liu, H. Luo, L. Karlinsky, and J. Glass, “Joint audio
andspeechunderstanding,”in2023IEEEAutomaticSpeechRecognition
andUnderstandingWorkshop(ASRU). IEEE,2023,pp.1–8.
[80] C. Tang, W. Yu, G. Sun, X. Chen, T. Tan, W. Li, L. Lu, Z. MA,
andC.Zhang,“SALMONN:Towardsgenerichearingabilitiesforlarge
language models,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations,2024.
