Study on the Helpfulness of Explainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI)
Tobias Labarta1,2, Elizaveta Kulicheva2, Ronja Froelian2, Christian Geißler2,
Xenia Melman2, and Julian von Klitzing1,2
1 Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institute, 10587 Berlin, Germany⋆⋆
2 Technische Universität Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
Abstract. ExplainableArtificialIntelligence(XAI)isessentialforbuild-
ing advanced machine learning-powered applications, especially in crit-
ical domains such as medical diagnostics or autonomous driving. Legal,
business,andethicalrequirementsmotivateusingeffectiveXAI,butthe
increasing number of different methods makes it challenging to pick the
right ones. Further, as explanations are highly context-dependent, mea-
suring the effectiveness of XAI methods without users can only reveal
a limited amount of information, excluding human factors such as the
ability to understand it. We propose to evaluate XAI methods via the
user’s ability to successfully perform a proxy task, designed such that a
good performance is an indicator for the explanation to provide helpful
information. In other words, we address the helpfulness of XAI for hu-
man decision-making. Further, a user study on state-of-the-art methods
wasconducted,showingdifferencesintheirabilitytogeneratetrustand
skepticismandtheabilitytojudgetherightfulnessofanAIdecisioncor-
rectly. Based on the results, we highly recommend using and extending
this approach for more objective-based human-centered user studies to
measure XAI performance in an end-to-end fashion.
Keywords: Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) · Goodness mea-
sures and evaluation · Human-Centered XAI · XAI User-Study · XAI
Evaluation.
1 Introduction
Society is facing the exponential application and exploitation of deep neural
network-powered artificial intelligence (AI) in various areas of daily life. AI sys-
tems that make use of learned models to solve classification, segmentation, and
transformation tasks for different input modalities such as images, video, text,
and natural spoken language have shown or have the potential to outperform
humansonspecifictasks[14,17].Sincetheyareusedindomainssuchasmobility,
energy management, finance, medical diagnosis, and in general health, security,
⋆⋆ WeexpressourgratitudetoFraunhoferHeinrich-Hertz-Instituteforfinanciallysup-
porting our work.
4202
tcO
41
]CH.sc[
1v69811.0142:viXra
and many further critical domains, risk management and reduction plays a cru-
cialroleinbuildingsafeAIsystems,whichisalsoincreasinglyrequiredbyrecent
regulatory advances [9,12].
To analyze and validate AI systems despite their statistical and often non-
deterministic process of creation and their complex structure [20], instead of
analytical proofs, proxy methods such as empirical evaluations and explainable
AI(XAI)areused.Empiricalevaluationsusingtestdatasetsandcalculatingper-
formancemeasuressuchasaconfusionmatrix,f-scoresorAUCprovideanarrow
view of what the model learned. A vast amount of very different explainable AI
methods have been proposed to understand, question, and investigate the mod-
els’ inner workings and decisions, not just during testing but also while they are
being applied in a real context. Choosing the right set of them for a specific
application context is hard, especially if that context requires human operators
to stay in control of the AI system. Thus, it is essential to develop methods
for measuring and comparing the performance of XAI methods, especially when
applied within specific contexts aimed at achieving distinct human-centered ob-
jectives. We term this "human task-related performance helpfulness." In this
framework, "helpfulness" is defined as a quantifiable improvement in user per-
formance on tasks that are aligned with the goals facilitated by the provision
of explanations. In our experiment, the primary function of the XAI is to aid
individuals in making informed decisions about their trust in the AI’s results.
Measuring effects on users is usually tested in a user study. Most of these
studies focus on usability aspects such as satisfaction which are biased by user
preferences and opinion. They are not general proof if a certain explanation
has a positive effect on the safety-related performances of an AI system. They
therefore measure trust (belief) related performance, not the ability to which
the explanation helps to control the AI system.
In this paper, we address the following research questions:
1. How accurate can XAI methods enable a user to judge AI decisions?
2. How far can XAI methods enable a user to trust AI decisions?
3. How far can XAI methods enable a user to question AI decisions?
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: We start with an overview of
the state of the art of measuring the performance of explainable AI methods.
We continue by contributing a new approach for measuring XAI performance
in human-centered user studies on objective performance criteria. We further
demonstratetheapproachbyconductingauserstudytocomparesixwell-known
XAI methods concerning their ability to enable the user to correctly judge the
trustworthiness of an AI-based classification decision. Finally, we discuss the
insights drawn by this human-centered, objective evaluation approach.
2 Measuring Explainability
2.1 Approaches for measuring explainability
Previous theoretical work on explainability and its measurement are often in-
spired by research from domains such as human-computer interaction, psychol-
2
ogy, philosophy, or machine learning. A common finding in most works is, that
explanations are context dependent. Therefore, they are required to define the
recipients of the explanation (the explainees), the use case in which they oper-
ate the AI system, and the specific situation in which the explanation is pro-
vided [6,27,43]. The typology of an explanation is given by an explanandum,
theobject(thingorphenomenon)tobeexplained,theexplanans(theactualex-
planation that is perceived by the users), and the relationship between both [5].
Cabitza further provides the following broad definition for the explanation pro-
videdbyanXAI-system:Itis"the output of any computational system aimed at
making AI-generated advice more understandable, appropriable and exploitable
by their intended users and decision makers".
Incontrasttothisspecificperspective,somesuggestmeasuringthedegreeof
completenessofanexplanationbyprovidingasetofallpossiblequestions[26,36,
39]. "A set of all possible questions" refers to a complete collection of questions
that could be asked to evaluate and understand an AI’s behavior and decisions
fully. Effectively, this would covers all aspects of the AI’s operation, rationale,
outcomes, and underlying mechanisms to ensure that the explanation of the AI
is complete. The idea behind providing such a set is to measure how well an
explanation satisfies the informational needs of users concerning the AI system.
Ifan explanationcan addressall possiblequestions, itcan be assumedcomplete
in the sense that it leaves no aspect of the AI unexplained. However, providing
such a complete set of questions for a real, practical use case is challenging
as it requires interpretation in the form of a transfer of the questions into the
specificapplicationcontext.Thisintroducessubjectivevariabilityandtherefore,
makesitdifficulttoobjectivelycomparetheexplanatorypowerbetweendifferent
contexts. However, having a set of template questions can support formulating
questionsausermightcomeupwithwhendesigninganAIsystem.Thisisfurther
supported by works like [27], which investigate the importance of such different
questions and criteria. The results of that work highlight that faithfulness and
translucence are the most important criteria and that experts and end-users
mostly align in how they rate each criterion.
Besides the local or global perspective, measuring explainability can also be
categorized into human-centered (e.g. that require human participation via a
user study) and methods without human involvement [42]. Approaches without
human feedback, for example, because they use an artificial benchmark with
definedgroundtruthforthedesiredexplanations[18,32,36],sufferfromadirect
proof of being transferable to real-world use cases. For example, since explana-
tionsarecontext-dependent,itisnotevidentthattheytransfertoothercontexts.
However, they are significantly cheaper to apply than user studies.
Human-centered evaluations often measure subjective qualities such as user
satisfaction or opinion by directly questioning participants. While they provide
aholisticperspectiveontheexplanationastheyareembeddedintheAIsystem
and context, they also introduce additional noise. They do not directly measure
the desired qualities but have to rely on proxy questions [42] which introduce
human bias [4].
3
Withourstudy,wewanttoextendandmotivatehuman-centeredevaluations
tomeasurenotjustsatisfaction,butalsothedegreetowhichtheexplananshelps
the users to reach their goals in terms of objective task performance.
2.2 User studies on the performance of XAI
Within the health domain, a study on XAI was conducted [13] to evaluate the
helpfulness of various approaches to AI assistance in digital pathology. Clinical
pathologistswereshownvariousexamplesoftheAI-assistanceinaquestionnaire,
combined with expert interviews. Results of the study show a preference for
pathologistsforsimplevisualexplanationsthatcorrespondtotheirwayofmak-
ing diagnostical decisions. On the other hand, participants expressed a concern
that simplistic explanations allow for a lot of ambiguity in their interpretation.
A study on XAI in the automotive domain [21] investigated the difference
in perception of the end users of seeing a textual description of the decision
and seeing a textual explanation of the decision without a decision itself. A user
was asked to evaluate whether the AI model made a correct decision based on
a textual description or an explanation of said decision. Results of this survey
show that users tended to trust the explanation without a decision rather than
a decision without an explanation.
Lakkaraju and Bastani [23] performed a study on the impact of misleading
explanations on users. They hypothesized that existing XAI trust measures are
not sufficient, as explanations could be perturbed, leading to users trusting a
problematic AI. For this purpose, they constructed a black-box AI making bail
decisions based on prohibited features like race or gender. On top, they added
an intrinsic explanation method but distorted it such that it returns other, de-
sired features as explanations that were not part of the decision, e.g. prior jail
incarcerations.Afterconductingthestudywith41participants,theycouldshow
thatuserswere9.8timesmorelikelytotrusttheblack-boxAIwithamisleading
explanation than just the black-box AI although the AI was making the same,
wrong decisions in both groups. They advocate for more interactive and ex-
plorableexplanations,whichtheybackwithresearchfindings[24]andasecond,
slightly adapted study they conducted.
Ribiero et al. [35] present an explanation method that is evaluated in this
study, LIME. In addition to that, they conduct two studies to evaluate their
newly developed method. First, they perform simulated user experiments to
investigatetheexplanationusefulnessofLIME andcompareittoothermethods.
Second, they evaluate LIME with real participants. Here, they checked if users
can decide which model performs better, based on the explanations. Ribiero et
al. also asked the users whether they trust the decision of a biased model, in
this case, the "Husky vs. Wolf" example [3,19,33]. They could show, that after
displayinganexplanationthathighlightsthemodelbias,significantlyfewerusers
trusted the bad model.
Adifferentapproachpresentedby[30]istomeasureandquantifytheamount
of information the model provides, by measuring the number of rules a user dis-
covers while interacting with an XAI system. While great at providing concrete
4
Input image, “Didthemodelpredict
explanation& correctly?”
groundtruth Didtheuser
accuratelyguess
Task: Classifytheimage themodel's
correctness?
XAI-Method
Model Modelprediction Correctness check of
modelprediction
elbisiV
“xoB
kcalB„
neddiH
Fig.1:OverviewoftheobjectivemethodologyforevaluatingXAI.Itstartswith
the classification of an image. The model makes a prediction hidden from the
user,thatwillbecheckedbyitscorrectnessinthebackground.Then,alocalpost-
hoc XAI method is applied to generate an explanation that will be presented
to the user, together with the input image and ground truth. Based on this
information, the user has to predict the model prediction.
and quantitative numbers the experiment setup, relies heavily on human inter-
pretable features, falling short for complex deep learning models.
A recently published user study is by Achtibat et al. [1] where they explored
the practical utility of Concept Relevance Propagation (CRP), a promising de-
velopment from Layerwise Relevance Propagation. Using provided explanations
as guidance, users had to determine if the model’s prediction was affected by a
bias. In this scenario, two image classification models were used, where one was
trained to take advantage of image borders for prediction. For both models, ex-
planationsweregeneratedforCRP,butalsoforotherpopularXAImethods,e.g.
SHAP, Grad-CAM, etc., that were also used in our study. As the design of this
user study allowed for objectively true or false replies from the participants, the
authors applied common classification result tools such as the confusion matrix
and calculated accuracy measures for each method.
3 An objective Methodology for evaluating XAI
A key finding from the literature research was the lack of objective methods
for evaluating XAI methods in a human-centered setting. Most of the exist-
ing approaches focus on qualitative studies investigating subjective features like
satisfaction or just collecting feedback. Quantitative Methods without human
involvement are often called to be more objective but are lacking the user focus
whichisessentialforappliedXAImethods.Theonlyapproachcombininghuman
involvement with quantitative methods was by Achtibat et al. [1], where users
were asked to assess if the model relied on artifacts in the prediction process.
5
This approach is a very interesting step in the right direction for quantitative
XAIuser-studies,butalsofocusedonasub-task,namelydetectionofmodelbias.
To allow for a more general approach, our work proposes an objective method-
ology for human-centered evaluations of XAI methods and executes it on six
commonly used explainability methods. An overview of this novel methodology
is shown in Figure 1.
3.1 Objective Human-Centered XAI Evaluation
Weproposetouseaproxytask,toevaluateourapproachandanswertheresearch
questions about the ability of XAI methods to enable the user to judge, trust,
and question AI decisions. The task is designed such that the performance to
solveitdirectlyrepresentstheabilitytousetheexplanationsfortheinvestigated
purpose,e.g.inourcase,todetermineiftheexplanationallowstheusertojudge
whether a model predicted the class of an input image correctly. Participants
should judge this by reviewing the input image, knowing the ground truth label
and the output of a single explainability method. During the experiment, the
participants were not aware of the model’s actual prediction or its correctness.
An example of this setup can be found in Fig. 1.
Evaluation Metrics As participants judge whether a model’s output is cor-
rect, their prediction can either be correct or false. Therefore, their replies can
be viewed as a confusion matrix of a binary classifier [45] as summarized in
table 1. With this abstraction, it is possible to calculate participants’ accu-
racy, sensitivity, and specificity. Accuracy = TP+TN expresses the par-
TP+TN+FP+TN
ticipant’s ability to correctly judge model predictions. As we used a balanced
number of instances, an accuracy of 0.5 is the baseline for random guessing.
This baseline means that in a binary classification task in balanced settings,
the simplest random guessing will result in correct judgments about half the
time, assuming an equal likelihood of either outcome. This sets a baseline accu-
racy of 0.5 as the point of comparison, indicating that any performance above
this threshold suggests a better-than-random ability to discern the correctness
of the model’s outputs. Sensitivity and specificity are used to measure partic-
ipants’ ability to identify when they can trust a model’s prediction and when
they should question a model’s prediction. The sensitivity is also known as true
positive rate TPR= TP . The specificity is also known as the true negative
TP+FP
rate TNR= TN .
TN+FN
Table 1: Confusion matrix
UserassumesthemodeliscorrectUserassumesthemodeliswrong
modeloutputwascorrect TruePositive(TP) FalseNegative(FN)
modeloutputwasfalse FalsePositive(FP) TrueNegative(TN)
6
Hypotheses testing and effect size To check if the survey results also hold
forthegeneralpopulation,hypothesistestingwasapplied.Thesignificancelevel
α was set to 0.05 for all tests.
A one-sample t-test was performed per method. This test is supposed to verify
if a sample metric mean of a method can be considered significantly larger or
lowerthantherandombaseline.Thus,thenullhypotheses(H0)andalternative
hypotheses (HA) were set according to the resulting sample metric mean size.
To measure the effect size of a method in comparison to the random baseline,
the effect size Cohen’s d [8] for the one-sample t-test was calculated. The mea-
sure is only calculated if the corresponding test result is significant. To evaluate
whichXAImethodsperformbestapairedt-test wasperformedforeachpairwise
method combination.
3.2 Image classification & XAI methods
Fig.2: Example Survey Question
To avoid model-specific biases, two different AI models, AlexNet [22] and
VGG16 [38], were selected for classification. The models were used without hy-
perparameteroptimization.Asimagesource,theimagenetv2-matched-frequency
dataset [34] was chosen. It is a subset of imagenet, which originally contains
1000 classes, and each class has 500 images on average. The objects shown in
the images range from everyday items to specific animals.
Based on the experimental setup with a classification of individual images,
only local explanation methods fit for the imaging modality could be used. Ad-
ditionally, the methods had to be applied post-hoc so they could work on the
same set of images. Other selection criteria included the use of well-documented
methods and the availability of code. Acceptance and relevance within the sci-
entific community were also key factors in the selection process. Following these
restrictions, six XAI methods were selected: Layer-wise relevance propagation
(LRP) [2,31], Gradient class activation mapping (GradCAM) [7,10], Local In-
terpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) [15], SHapley Additive exPla-
nations (SHAP) [28,29,37,40], Integrated Gradients (Integrated Gradients) [41]
and Confidence Scores.
7
Confidence Scores is the only numerical explanation type used in this study. It
provides information on how confident the AI model is that the prediction with
first,second,orthirdrankiscorrect.Italsoprovidesinformationaboutthecon-
fidence gaps between the ranks. The confidence score is generated based on the
normalized results of the last model layer before picking the highest one as the
one the model outputs as a prediction. Therefore, it is not a strict probability
that the result is correct, but rather a comparative value about how close the
highest-ranked decisions were.
3.3 Survey design
Besides a set of demographic questions, incl. educational background, machine
learning experience, and visual impairment, the survey consisted of 12 indepen-
dent questionnaires with 24 pictures each. Of these 24 pictures, 12 were the
same across all questionnaires to provide a reliable baseline and the other 12
were semi-randomly picked. They were picked to ensure that each combination
oftheXAImethod,AImodel,andoutputwasuniformlyrepresented.Detailsof
this process can be found online3.
Tominimizebiases,thefollowingprecautionsweremade:AllXAIoutputwas
used to generate a heatmap which then was overlayed over the original image.
Additionally,theheatmapsusedthesamecolormap,onesuitableformostcolor-
based visual impairments, and a color bar was added to make the survey as
accessible as possible. For reference see Fig. 2.
4 Survey Results
4.1 Questionnaire responses
The survey was closed after one month of execution time. Until the date of
13.07.2022, 139 participants completed the questionnaire. The survey was ad-
vertised using the TU Berlin social media pages, resulting in a substantial num-
ber of participants with a university background. Of all participants, 24 were
undergraduates,while44weregraduatestudents.Additionally,26postgraduate
students took part, as well as seven participants with a PhD. Among the par-
ticipants, no bias due to education, experience with machine learning, or visual
impairment could be identified (see Appendix A for mean accuracy based on
demographicgroups).Amoredetaileddemographicoverviewoftheparticipants
can be found in Appendix B. To illustrate the results, the accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity results of the 139 participants are shown. The accuracy conver-
gence over an increasing number of participants can be found in the Appendix,
see A.2. Figure 3 presents the accuracy results. Due to the questionnaire gener-
ation procedure, each participant could answer four questions per XAI method.
Thus, the only possible results per XAI method were 0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and
1.0.Thehighestmeanaccuracy overallparticipantswasachievedbyConfidence
3 complete link : https://github.com/tlabarta/helpfulnessofxai
8
Scores with ≈ 0.698. This was followed by GradCAM ≈ 0.603, LRP ≈ 0.583,
SHAP ≈ 0.558, LIME ≈ 0.545 and Integrated Gradients ≈ 0.532. Except from
Confidence Scores, which reached a median of 0.75, all other methods had a
median of 0.5. Figure 4a shows two opposite metrics: the sensitivity, as well as
the specificity results. Based on the questionnaire generation procedure, each
participant could answer two questions per XAI methods where the models de-
cided correctly. Thus, the only possible sensitivity results per participant were
0.0, 0.5, and 1.0. The highest mean over all participants was achieved by Grad-
CAM with ≈ 0.784, followed by Confidence Scores with ≈ 0.752, LRP ≈ 0.748,
LIME ≈ 0.590, Integrated Gradients ≈ 0.561 and SHAP ≈ 0.335. GradCAM,
Confidence Scores andLRP reachedamedianof1.0,LIME andIntegrated Gra-
dients a median of 0.5, whereas SHAP reached a median of 0.0. Due to the
chosen questionnaire generation procedure, each participant could answer two
questions per XAI method where the chosen models decided incorrectly. Thus,
the only potential specificity values per participant were 0.0, 0.5, and 1.0. The
highestmeanoverallparticipantswasachievedbySHAP with≈0.781,followed
byConfidenceScores with≈0.644.IntegratedGradients reached≈0.504,LIME
= 0.5, GradCAM ≈ 0.421 and LRP ≈ 0.417. SHAP reached a median of 1.0
whereastheotherXAImethodshadamedianof0.5.Participantresponsescould
be influenced by the model that an explanation was generated for.
Asdescribedinsection3.3,thepredictionsweresplithalf/halfbetweenboth
models.SinceVGG16generallyachievesabettertaskperformancethanAlexNet
one would assume a noticeable impact on the participant accuracy across all
XAI methods. The assumption was that a better-performing model leads to
more profound decisions and weights, which would have a positive impact on
thegeneratedexplanations.FigureA.3intheAppendixshowsthatonlyasmall
difference between the two models existed. Participants performed marginally
better when explanations were generated on VGG16 predictions, with an ac-
curacy of 0.61 versus 0.56 for explanations generated on AlexNet predictions.
Thereislittletonodifferenceinparticipantperformancebetweenthetwomod-
els for Integrated Gradients, SHAP and GradCAM. A noticeable difference can
be seen for Confidence Scores, LIME, and LRP.
4.2 Qualitative Feedback
Inadditiontothequestionnaireresponses,participantfeedbackaboutthestudy
was received. Some of the feedback could be valuable for future studies. One
of the participants pointed out that it was hard to decide without knowing if
a model was trained to recognize a specific class. On one hand, it would help
the participant to make a decision, but on the other hand, it would also enable
certain bias since it is possible to assume a participant would rather tend to
answer "yes" to those classes which are in the trained classes list, and rather
"no" to those classes not on the list. Also due to the broad participant scope of
this study, it can be assumed that this information would not be helpful for all
participants.Anotherpointwasinthecaseofmultipleobjectsshowninapicture.
Feedback was that it would be helpful to highlight the object to be classified if
9
there is more than one. For example, when having multiple dog breeds on an
image, it wou80ld be good to know which one is to be classified. A disadvantage
of this appro7a0ch is that the model itself is not "told" which object it is asked to
60 identify, this task belongs to the challenge of image recognition as well. Another 50
feedbackwas4,0thatevenpeoplewithamachinelearningbackgroundhadinsome
cases a hard30time making a decision. This could explain the observed very low-
20
performance differences between machine learning experts and non-experts.
10
0
ConfidenceScores gradCAM LRP SHAP LIME IntegratedGradients
dehcaer
ohw
stnapicitraP
rebmuN
erocS
ycaruccA
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75 1.0
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
ConfidenceScores gradCAM LRP SHAP LIME IntegratedGradients
ycaruccA
mean = 0.698
mean = 0.603 mean = 0.583 mean = 0.558 mean = 0.545 mean = 0.532
XAI Method
Fig.3: The mean accuracy of participants in determining the correctness of the
AI’s predictions varied by XAI method used. Confidence Scores consistently
outperformed all other methods, while the remaining methods showed minimal
to no differences in results.
5 Discussion
Continuingwiththediscussion,table2statestheresultsfortheone-samplet-test
performed on the accuracy means. All means were significantly greater than the
random baseline of 0.5 (better than chance). Only Confidence Scores’s accuracy
was significantly higher than for all other methods. These findings were drawn
from the pairwise conducted paired t-tests. Thus, Confidence Scores helped a
user most to judge an AI’s decision with a strong effect. All other methods were
similarly helpful, with small to no practically measurable effect.
ItcanbeassumedthatConfidenceScores’ssuperioraccuracy (i.e.overallperfor-
mance) originates partially from its relatively simple structure and clear results
ofjustclassprobabilities.Theexplanationsgeneratedbytheothermethodshave
considerablymoreinformationthanjustclasseswithaprobabilityandtherefore
needmoreinterpretation.Participantshadtoconsiderthelocationofhighlighted
areas, as well as the color and brightness.
Furthermore, table 3 states the results for the one-sample t-test performed
onthesensitivity andspecificity means.AllXAImethodsbutSHAP hadmeans
that were significantly greater than 0.5. However, only GradCAM had a large
positive effect.
Overall, GradCAM, Confidence Scores and LRP helped a user most to trust
an AI’s decision with a medium to strong effect. Interestingly, SHAP even neg-
atively impacted trust in an AI’s decision with a medium negative effect. SHAP
and Confidence Scores achieved means that were significantly greater than 0.5.
Integrated Gradients’s and LIME’s means were not significantly different from
10
80
60
40
20
0
gradCAM ConfidenceScores LRP LIME IntegratedGradients SHAP
dehcaer
ohw
stnapicitraP
rebmuN
erocS
ytivitisneS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
gradCAM ConfidenceScores LRP LIME IntegratedGradients SHAP
ytivitisneS
mean = 0.784 mean = 0.752 mean = 0.748
mean = 0.590 mean = 0.561 80
mean = 0.335
60
40
20
XAI Method
0 (a) sensitivity
SHAP ConfidenceScores IntegratedGradients LIME gradCAM LRP
dehcaer
ohw
stnapicitraP
rebmuN
erocS
yticificepS
0.0 0.5 1.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
SHAP ConfidenceScores IntegratedGradients LIME gradCAM LRP
yticificepS
mean = 0.781
mean = 0.644
mean = 0.504 mean = 0.500
mean = 0.421 mean = 0.417
XAI Method
(b) specificity
Fig.4:Participants’meansensitivity&specificityinjudgingwhethertheAIwas
correct in its prediction, per XAI method. SHAP performs best for sensitivity
and worst of all methods for specificity. Confidence Scores perform the best in
both measures, besides SHAP.
Table 2: Hypothesis testing: accuracy
XAI method Accuracy HA p d
Confidence Scores ≈ 0.698 > 0.5< .0010.84
GradCAM ≈ 0.603 > 0.5< .0010.46
LRP ≈ 0.583 > 0.5< .0010.40
SHAP ≈ 0.558 > 0.5< .0010.28
LIME ≈ 0.545 > 0.5 .009 0.20
Integrated Gradients ≈ 0.532 > 0.5 .04 0.15
0.5.GradCAM andLRP meansweresignificantlysmallerthan0.5.Thus,SHAP
helped a user most to question an AI’s decision with a strong effect.
TheImagenetdatasetwaschosenbecauseoftheassumption,thatmostpeo-
ple naturally are domain experts in classifying its images, as it shows objects of
daily life. However, some participants mentioned that they had never seen some
ofthefruits,animals,orotherobjectsthatwerepresentedbefore,meaningthey
lacked the required domain knowledge. This naturally impacts the ability to in-
terprettheexplanation,suchasnotbeingawareoftheanatomicuniquefeatures
of certain dog breeds.
Usually, XAI methods are applied to help domain experts in evaluating model
predictions. These should be aware of relevant details within their domain and
theirresponsemightvarycomparedtooursurvey.Inmostapplications,thefield
11
Table 3: Hypothesis testing: specificity & sensitivity
XAI method Specificity HA p d Sensitivity HA p d
SHAP ≈0.781 >0.5<.001 0.85 ≈0.335 <0.5<.001-0.43
ConfidenceScores ≈0.644 >0.5<.001 0.44 ≈0.752 >0.5<.001 0.77
IntegratedGradients ≈0.504 >0.5 .458 notsignificant ≈0.561 >0.5 .037 0.15
LIME 0.5 ̸=0.5 1.0 notsignificant ≈0.590 >0.5 .004 0.23
GradCAM ≈0.421 <0.5 .007 -0.21 ≈0.784 >0.5<.001 0.89
LRP ≈0.417 <0.5 .002 -0.25 ≈0.748 >0.5<.001 0.74
of predictions is much leaner and more focused on a specific application than
the 1000 classes presented in ImageNetV2.
Fig.5: Right prediction based on a wrong feature
Another critical point is the potential effect of so-called model bias on the
surveyresults.Itoccursincaseswhenamodelmakesacorrectpredictionbased
on wrong features. An example of this phenomenon can be seen in Fig. 5 where
a horse picture from Pascal VOC data set was classified correctly by Fisher
vectorclassifier[25]becauseofaphotographertaginthebottomleftcorner.By
seeing the explanation of this example, it should be possible for most users to
detect the model bias and conclude that the model did not classify this image
correctly. Detecting such model bias usually requires expert knowledge in the
machine learning field.
Noteworthy is also a potential bias in the study population, as it was shared
within university context for everyone to attend, without demographic selection
criteria.Whenanalyzingparticipantperformancebasedondemographiccriteria,
no statistically significant impact could be identified, however, that does not
exclude potential bias from other demographic criteria that were not tracked.
Sinceamodelmadetherightclassification,eventhoughbasedoncompletely
irrelevant features, user decisions would contribute to false-negative samples in
a confusion matrix. In the context of this survey, it reduces the accuracy and
sensitivity of the XAI method. The problem here is that even though an XAI
method showed a good explanation of the decision, its performance would still
be degraded since the model did a bad job of learning the class features. This is
a potential issue that could not be fully excluded from the survey, as there was
no documented list of identified model biases available for VGG16 or AlexNet
on ImageNet.
Tosummarize,theresultsshowedaclearsuperiorityoftheheuristicexplanation
methodConfidenceScores inaccuracy andagoodperformanceinsensitivity and
specificity. A potential risk of the method is that purely heuristic explanations
12
can lead to heuristic biases as they tend to oversimplify complex situations [44].
This oversimplification and an high enough trust on the users side can lead to
over reliance [11], in which the users trust the model to much and let it cloud
theirjudgement.Agoodexplanationmethodneedstoaccountforthisbyclearly
visualizing the relevant features and combinations, to make it as easy as possi-
ble for the user to identify wrong predictions. In terms of specificity, SHAP was
significantly above random baseline and superior to all other methods although
it performed very badly for sensitivity and slightly above random baseline for
accuracy. All in all, no explanation method overperformed in all cases.
The results indicate that it would therefore be recommended to not rely on a
single,monolithicexplanationapproach.Instead,amorediverseandinteractive
framework of explanation methods could be beneficial. This explanation frame-
work should be focused on the explanation task and the user’s needs. Diverse
in this context is understood as a selection of different explanation approaches
rather than a single method. Such a framework could also help with reducing
thepreviouslydiscussedissuesoftherequireddomainandexpertknowledgefor
certain explanation cases and could be more effective in detecting model bias.
The design of such an explanation framework, as well as its evaluation, would
be a research topic for the future.
Akeycontributionofthisworkwastheproposalofanew,objectivemethod-
ologyforevaluatingXAI.Thesurveyexecutedwiththismethodologyshowsthe
benefit of the approach, extending highly subjective aspects of human-centered
XAI evaluation with task performance-related ones. A point of critique is the
relativelystagedscenarioofusersnotknowingthemodeldecision.Usually,users
shouldbeawareofthedecisionbutmightnotbeabletojudgewhetheritiscor-
rect or not. A thorough examination of the objective methodology as well as an
approach that is closer to reality should also be part of future research.
6 Conclusion
Within this paper, an objective methodology for evaluating XAI methods was
proposed. From literature research, a lack of quantitative methods for human-
centered XAI evaluation was identified, which this work aimed to contribute
to. This approach was evaluated in a user study, where six state-of-the-art XAI
methods were implemented. The goal of the user study was to examine how far
existing methods enable users to judge, trust, and question AI decisions.
The results show that of the tested methods only Confidence Scores sub-
stantially enabled users to judge an AI decision, responding to the first research
question. Aimed at the second research question, the methods GradCAM, Con-
fidence Scores and LRP performed best in making users trust an AI decision.
Forthefinalresearchquestion,itcanbeconcludedthatSHAP enabledusersby
far the most in questioning an AI decision.
From the research findings but also literature research, it can be concluded
that using individual explanation methods is not sufficient for enabling users to
judge, trust, and question an AI effectively. Instead, the design of an interactive
13
frameworkofmultipleexplanationmethodswasproposed,toachievebetteruser
focus.Further,wewouldsuggestsettingupstudiesthatdonotjustmeasurethe
user’sclassificationperformanceondetectingtrueAIdecisionsbutalsomeasure
if they can detect non-wanted biases or shortcuts [16]. A shortcoming of the
proposedevaluationmethodisthatitisstillrelativelycostlytoexecute,beinga
userstudyrequiringhumaninvolvement.Wehopetoseefurtherhuman-centered
XAI studies that extend our approach to further proxy tasks to create a solid
ground for future XAI research and the creation of trustworthy AI applications.
Disclosure of Interests The authors declare no conflict of interest.
14
References
1. Achtibat, R., Dreyer, M., Eisenbraun, I., Bosse, S., Wiegand, T., Samek, W.,
Lapuschkin, S.: From attribution maps to human-understandable explanations
through concept relevance propagation. Nature Machine Intelligence 5(9), 1006–
1019 (2023)
2. Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Müller, K.R., Samek, W.: On
pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance
propagation. PloS one 10(7), e0130140 (2015)
3. Badillo,S.,Banfai,B.,Birzele,F.,Davydov,I.I.,Hutchinson,L.,Kam-Thong,T.,
Siebourg-Polster,J.,Steiert,B.,Zhang,J.D.:Anintroductiontomachinelearning.
Clinical pharmacology & therapeutics 107(4), 871–885 (2020)
4. Bertrand, A., Belloum, R., Eagan, J.R., Maxwell, W.: How cognitive biases affect
xai-assisted decision-making: A systematic review. In: Proceedings of the 2022
AAAI/ACM conference on AI, ethics, and society. pp. 78–91 (2022)
5. Cabitza, F., Campagner, A., Malgieri, G., Natali, C., Schneeberger, D., Stoeger,
K., Holzinger, A.: Quod erat demonstrandum?-towards a typology of the concept
of explanation for the design of explainable ai. Expert Systems with Applications
213, 118888 (2023)
6. Carli, R., Najjar, A., Calvaresi, D.: Risk and exposure of xai in persuasion and
argumentation:Thecaseofmanipulation.In:InternationalWorkshoponExplain-
able, Transparent Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems. pp. 204–220.
Springer (2022)
7. Chattopadhay, A., Sarkar, A., Howlader, P., Balasubramanian, V.N.: Grad-
cam++: Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional
networks. In: 2018 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision
(WACV). pp. 839–847. IEEE (2018)
8. Cohen,J.:Statisticalpoweranalysisforthebehavioralsciences.Routledge(2013)
9. CouncilofEuropeanUnion:Regulation(eu)2016/679oftheeuropeanparliament
andofthecouncilof27april2016ontheprotectionofnaturalpersonswithregard
to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing directive 95/46/ec (general data protection regulation) (text with eea
relevance) (May 2016), https://gdpr.eu
10. Das,A.,Rad,P.:Opportunitiesandchallengesinexplainableartificialintelligence
(xai): A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11371 (2020)
11. Du, Y., Antoniadi, A.M., McNestry, C., McAuliffe, F.M., Mooney, C.: The role
of xai in advice-taking from a clinical decision support system: A comparative
userstudyoffeaturecontribution-basedandexample-basedexplanations.Applied
Sciences 12(20), 10323 (2022)
12. of European Union, C.: Ethics guidelines for trustwor-
thy ai. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/
ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai, accessed: 2022-12-30
13. Evans,T.,Retzlaff,C.O.,Geißler,C.,Kargl,M.,Plass,M.,Müller,H.,Kiehl,T.R.,
Zerbe, N., Holzinger, A.: The explainability paradox: Challenges for xai in digital
pathology. Future Generation Computer Systems 133, 281–296 (2022)
14. Farhat,H.,Sakr,G.E.,Kilany,R.:Deeplearningapplicationsinpulmonarymedical
imaging:recentupdatesandinsightsoncovid-19.Machinevisionandapplications
31(6), 1–42 (2020)
15. Garreau,D.,Mardaoui,D.:Whatdoeslimereallyseeinimages?In:International
Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 3620–3629. PMLR (2021)
15
16. Geirhos, R., Jacobsen, J.H., Michaelis, C., Zemel, R., Brendel, W., Bethge, M.,
Wichmann, F.A.: Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine In-
telligence 2(11), 665–673 (2020)
17. Grigorescu, S., Trasnea, B., Cocias, T., Macesanu, G.: A survey of deep learn-
ing techniques for autonomous driving. Journal of Field Robotics 37(3), 362–386
(2020)
18. Hedström, A., Weber, L., Bareeva, D., Motzkus, F., Samek, W., Lapuschkin, S.,
Höhne, M.M.C.: Quantus: an explainable ai toolkit for responsible evaluation of
neural network explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06861 (2022)
19. Hodges, J., Mohan, S.: Machine learning in gifted education: A demonstration
using neural networks. Gifted Child Quarterly 63(4), 243–252 (2019)
20. Hu, X., Chu, L., Pei, J., Liu, W., Bian, J.: Model complexity of deep learning: A
survey. Knowledge and Information Systems 63(10), 2585–2619 (2021)
21. Kim, J., Rohrbach, A., Darrell, T., Canny, J., Akata, Z.: Textual explanations
for self-driving vehicles. In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision (ECCV). pp. 563–578 (2018)
22. Krizhevsky,A.,Sutskever,I.,Hinton,G.E.:Imagenetclassificationwithdeepcon-
volutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM 60(6), 84–90 (2017)
23. Lakkaraju, H., Bastani, O.: " how do i fool you?" manipulating user trust via
misleadingblackboxexplanations.In:ProceedingsoftheAAAI/ACMConference
on AI, Ethics, and Society. pp. 79–85 (2020)
24. Lakkaraju, H., Kamar, E., Caruana, R., Leskovec, J.: Faithful and customizable
explanations of black box models. In: Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Con-
ference on AI, Ethics, and Society. pp. 131–138 (2019)
25. Lapuschkin,S.,Wäldchen,S.,Binder,A.,Montavon,G.,Samek,W.,Müller,K.R.:
Unmaskingcleverhanspredictorsandassessingwhatmachinesreallylearn.Nature
communications 10(1), 1–8 (2019)
26. Liao, Q.V., Gruen, D., Miller, S.: Questioning the ai: informing design practices
forexplainableaiuserexperiences.In:Proceedingsofthe2020CHIConferenceon
Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–15 (2020)
27. Liao, Q.V., Zhang, Y., Luss, R., Doshi-Velez, F., Dhurandhar, A.: Connecting
algorithmicresearchandusagecontexts:Aperspectiveofcontextualizedevaluation
forexplainableai.In:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonHumanComputation
and Crowdsourcing. vol. 10, pp. 147–159 (2022)
28. Lundberg,S.M.,Erion,G.,Chen,H.,DeGrave,A.,Prutkin,J.M.,Nair,B.,Katz,
R., Himmelfarb, J., Bansal, N., Lee, S.I.: From local explanations to global un-
derstanding with explainable ai for trees. Nature machine intelligence 2(1), 56–67
(2020)
29. Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.
Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017)
30. Matarese, M., Rea, F., Sciutti, A.: How much informative is your xai? a decision-
makingassessmenttasktoobjectivelymeasurethegoodnessofexplanations.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.04379 (2023)
31. Montavon, G., Binder, A., Lapuschkin, S., Samek, W., Müller, K.R.: Layer-wise
relevance propagation: an overview. Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and
visualizing deep learning pp. 193–209 (2019)
32. Müller, H., Holzinger, A.: Kandinsky patterns. Artificial Intelligence 300, 103546
(2021)
33. Murdoch,W.J.,Singh,C.,Kumbier,K.,Abbasi-Asl,R.,Yu,B.:Definitions,meth-
ods, and applications in interpretable machine learning. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 116(44), 22071–22080 (2019)
16
34. Recht, B., Schmidt, L., Roelofs, R., Shankar, V.: Imagenetv2. https://
imagenetv2.org, accessed: 2022-09-17
35. Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: " why should i trust you?" explaining the
predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 1135–1144 (2016)
36. Salewski,L.,Koepke,A.,Lensch,H.,Akata,Z.:Clevr-x:Avisualreasoningdataset
for natural language explanations. In: International Workshop on Extending Ex-
plainable AI Beyond Deep Models and Classifiers. pp. 69–88. Springer (2022)
37. Shapley, L.S.: A value for n-person games. Classics in game theory 69 (1997)
38. Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014)
39. Sovrano, F., Vitali, F.: How to quantify the degree of explainability: Experiments
and practical implications. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Sys-
tems (FUZZ-IEEE). pp. 1–9. IEEE (2022)
40. Speith,T.:Areviewoftaxonomiesofexplainableartificialintelligence(xai)meth-
ods.In:2022ACMConferenceonFairness,Accountability,andTransparency.pp.
2239–2250 (2022)
41. Sundararajan,M.,Taly,A.,Yan,Q.:Axiomaticattributionfordeepnetworks.In:
International conference on machine learning. pp. 3319–3328. PMLR (2017)
42. Vilone, G., Longo, L.: Notions of explainability and evaluation approaches for
explainable artificial intelligence. Information Fusion 76, 89–106 (2021)
43. van der Waa, J., Nieuwburg, E., Cremers, A., Neerincx, M.: Evaluating xai: A
comparison of rule-based and example-based explanations. Artificial Intelligence
291, 103404 (2021)
44. Wang, D., Yang, Q., Abdul, A., Lim, B.Y.: Designing theory-driven user-centric
explainable ai. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in
computing systems (2019)
45. Yerushalmy, J.: Statistical problems in assessing methods of medical diagnosis,
with special reference to x-ray techniques. Public Health Reports (1896-1970) pp.
1432–1449 (1947)
17
Appendix A Additional Visualizations
(a) educational background
(b) machine learning experience in years
(c) self-assessment of the usefulness of machine learning experience for answering the
survey
(d) self-assessment on visual impairment
Fig.A.1: Mean Accuracy based on educational background, machine learning
experience in years, self-assessment of the usefulness of machine learning expe-
rience, and self-assessment on visual impairment.
i
1.0 1.0
0.9 0.9
0.8 0.8
0.7 0.7
0.6 0.6
0.5 0.5
0.4 0.4
0.3 0.3
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Number Participants
ycaruccA
ConfidenceScores
gradCAM
LRP
SHAP
LIME IntegratedGradients
Fig.A.2: Convergence of accuracy over the number of participants.
Fig.A.3: Difference in accuracy between VGG16 and AlexNet
1.00 1.00
0.75 0.75
0.50 0.50
0.25 0.25
0.00 0.00
ConfidenceScores gradCAM LRP SHAP LIME IntegratedGradients
XAI-Method
oitaR
Accuracy
Sensitivity
0.784 0.781 Specificity
0.752 0.748 baseline
0.698
0.644
0.603 0.583 0.558 0 0 . . 5 5 4 9 5 0 0 0 . . 5 5 3 6 2 1
0.500 0.504
0.421 0.417
0.335
Fig.A.4: Summary of means for accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity for all ex-
amined XAI methods compared to the random baseline.
ii
Appendix B Demographic overview of participants
Table 1: Results of demographic questions
Education
HighSchoolTradeSchoolUndergraduate Graduate PostGraduate PhD Other
20 4 24 44 26 7 1
MLExperience
None Lessthan1year Between1and3 Between3and5 Morethan5
65 33 26 7 5
PerceivedhelpfulnessofMLexperience
Notatallhelpful Notsohelpful SomewhathelpfulVeryhelpful
2 15 43 11
iii
