(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
Vision Based Game Development Using Human
Computer Interaction
Ms.S.Sumathi Dr.S.K.Srivatsa Dr.M.Uma Maheswari
Bharath University St.Joseph College of Engineering Bharath University
Chennai,India Chennai,India Chennai,India
Abstract— A Human Computer Interface (HCI) location and shape of the nose, as it is located in the
System for playing games is designed here for middle of the face it is more comfortable to use it as
more natural communication with the machines. the feature that moves the mouse pointer and
The system presented here is a vision-based defines its coordinates, and it is located on the axis
system for detection of long voluntary eye blinks that the face rotates about, so it basically does not
and interpretation of blink patterns for change its distinctive convex shape which makes it
communication between man and machine. This easier to track as the face moves. We use the human
system replaces the mouse with the human face feature Eyes to simulate mouse clicks, so the user
as a new way to interact with the computer. can fire their events as he blinks. While different
Facial features (nose tip and eyes) are detected devices were used in HCI (e.g. infrared cameras,
and tracked in real-time to use their actions as sensors, microphones) we used a webcam that
mouse events. The coordinates and movement of affords a moderate resolution and frame rate as the
the nose tip in the live video feed are translated capturing device in order to make the ability of
to become the coordinates and movement of the using the program affordable for all individuals.
mouse pointer on the application. The left/right
We present an algorithm that distinguishes true
eye blinks fire left/right mouse click events. The
eye blinks from involuntary ones, detects and tracks
system works with inexpensive USB cameras and
the desired facial features precisely, and fast enough
runs at a frame rate of 30 frames per second.
to be applied in real-time. In our work we are trying
Keywords: Human Computer Interface (HCI), to implement this in playing video games. Getting
SSR Filter, Hough transform the player physically involved in the game provides
a more immersive experience and a feeling of
taking direct part rather than just playing as an
I. INTRODUCTION
external beholder. Already motion sensors have
One of the promising fields in artificial been implemented to recognize physical activity, we
intelligence is HCI. Human-Computer Interface can even use finger gestures in playing games but
(HCI) can be described as the point of we increase human computer interaction by using
communication between the human and a computer. our eyes in playing games.
HCI aims to use human features to interact with the
We propose an accurate algorithm that
computer. The system tracks the computer user's
distinguishes true eye blinks from involuntary ones,
movements with a video camera and translates them
detects and measures their duration, and fast enough
into the movements of the mouse pointer on the
to be applied in real-time to control a non –
screen. The tip of the user's nose can be tracked and
intrusive interface for computer users in playing
captured with a webcam and monitor its movements
games. This system can be used in playing games
in order to translate it to some events that
like first shooter game, a role playing game and an
communicate with the computer. In our system, the
action game. When we compare eye-based and
nose tip is the pointing device, because of the
mouse-based control it is found that using an eye
147 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
tracker can increase the immersion and leads to a the HCI. Researchers chose different facial features:
stronger feeling of being part of the game. We are eye pupils, eyebrows, nose tip, lips, eye lids’
tracking the nose movements and eye blinks for corners, mouth corners for each of which they
playing the games, the nose movements are provided an explanation to choose that particular
interfaced with the mouse movements and the eye one.
blinks are interfaced with the mouse clicks. The
eye-movement or eye blink controlled human- Different detection techniques were applied where
computer interface systems are very useful for the goal was to achieve more accurate results with
persons who cannot speak or use hands to less processing time. To control the mouse pointer
communicate. There are no lighting requirements or various points were tracked ranging from the middle
offline templates needed for the proper functioning distance between the eyes, the middle distance
of the system. It works with inexpensive USB between the eyebrows, to the nose tip. To simulate
cameras and runs at a frame rate of 30 frames per mouse clicks; eye blinks, mouth opening/closing,
second. and sometimes eyebrow movement were used. Each
HCI method that we read about had some
The automatic initialization phase is triggered drawbacks, some methods used expensive
by the analysis of the involuntary blinking of the equipments, some were not fast enough to achieve
current computer user, which creates an online real-time execution, and others were not robust and
template of the eye to be used for tracking. This precise enough to replace the mouse. We tried to
phase occurs each time the current correlation score profit from the experience that other researchers
of the tracked eye falls below a defined threshold in gained in the HCI field and added our own ideas to
order to allow the system to recover and regain its produce an application that is fast, robust, and
accuracy in detecting the blinks. This system can be useable.
utilized by users for applications that require mouse
clicks as input for e.g. games. The main Eye movement events detected in EOG signals
contribution of this paper is to provide a such as saccades, fixations and blinks have been
reimplementation of this system that is able to run used to control robots or a wearable system for
in real time at 30 frames per second on readily medical care givers. Patmore et al. described a
available and affordable webcams in playing video system that provides a pointing device for people
games. with physical disabilities. All of these systems use
basic eye movements or eye-gaze direction but they
II. RELATED WORK do not implement movement sequences which
provide a more versatile input modality for gaming
With the growth of attention about computer
applications.
vision, the interest in HCI has increased
proportionally. Different human features and III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
monitoring devices were used to achieve HCI, but
This system design can be broken down into
during our research we were only into works that
three modules, (1) Facial Features tracking (2)
involved the use of facial features and webcams.
Integrating Nose tip movements with the mouse
cursor (3) Replacing the eye blinks with the mouse
The current evolution of computer technologies
click events.
has enhanced various applications in human-
computer interface. Face and gesture recognition is
Face Detection
a part of this field, which can be applied in various
applications such as in robotic, security system, In this module, we propose a real-time face
drivers monitor, and video coding system. detection algorithm using Six-Segmented
Rectangular (SSR) filter, distance information, and
We noticed a large diversity of the facial features
template matching technique. Since human face is a
that were selected, the way they were detected and
dynamic object and has a high degree of variability,
tracked, and the functionality that they presented for
148 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
we propose the method combine both feature-based s(x ,y ) = s(x , y - 1) + i(x ,y) (2)
and image-based approach to detect the point ii(x ,y ) = ii(x - 1, y) + s(x ,y ) (3)
between the eyes by using Six-Segmented
Where s(x, y) is the cumulative row sum,
Rectangular filter (SSR filter). The proposed SSR
filter, which is the rectangle divided into 6
s(x , -1) = 0, and ii(-1, y) = 0.
segments, operates by using the concept of bright-
dark relation around Between-the-Eyes area. Using the integral image, the sum of pixels within
Between-the-Eyes is selected as face representative rectangle D (r ) can be computed at high speed with
s
in our detection because its characteristic is four array references as shown in Fig.1.
common to most people and is easily seen for a
wide range of face orientation. s = (ii (x ,y ) + ii(x - W, y - L)) - (ii (x - W,
r
y) + ii(x, y - L )) (4)
Firstly, we scan a certain size of rectangle divided
into six segments throughout the face image. Then
their bright-dark relations are tested if its center can
be a candidate of Between-the-Eyes. Next, the
distance information obtained from stereo camera
and template matching is applied to detect the true
Between-the-Eyes among candidates. Between-the-
Eyes has dark part (eyes and eyebrows) on both
sides, and has comparably bright part on upper side
(forehead), and lower side (nose and cheekbone).
This characteristic is stable for any facial
expression.
We use an intermediate representation of image
called integral image to calculate sums of pixel
Figure 1. Integral Image
values in each segment of SSR filter. Firstly, SSR
filter is scanned on the image and the average gray
2) SSR filter
level of each segment is calculated from integral
image. Then, the bright-dark relations between each At the beginning, a rectangle is scanned throughout
segment are tested to see whether its center can be a the input image. This rectangle is segmented into
candidate point for Between-the- Eyes. Next, the six segments as shown in Fig.2 (a).
stereo camera is used to find the distance
information and the suitable Between-the- Eyes
template size.. Finally the true Between-the-Eyes
can be detected.
1) Integral Image
The SSR filter is computed by using intermediate
representation for image called integral image. For
the original image i(x, y), the integral image is
Figure 2. SSR Filter
defined as,
i i ( x , y ) = ∑ ∑ i ( x ' , y ' ) W e denote the total sum of pixel value of each
(1) segment (B1 B6) as 1 6 b b S S. The proposed SSR
x',≤x y'≤y
filter is used to detect the Between-the-Eyes based
The integral image can be computed in one pass
on two characteristics of face geometry.
over the original image by the following pair of
recurrences.
149 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
(1) The nose area ( n S ) is brighter than the right Then right and left half of p is re-defined again
mn
and left eye area ( er S and el S , respectively) as separately as pr (i=0,...,15, j = 3, ...., 15) and p1
ij ij
shown in Fig.2 (b), where (i=0,...,15, j = 3, ...., 15), respectively, each has been
converted to have average value of 128 and
S = S + S
n b2 b5 standard deviation of 64.
S = S + S
er b1 b4
S = S + S Then the left mismatching value (D) and the right
el b3 b6 l
mismatching value (D) are calculated by using the
r
Then, following equation.
S n > S er (5) D ∑( p ijl− t ijl) 2 (8)
S n > S el (6) l = ν ijl
(2) The eye area (both eyes and eyebrows) ( e S ) is D ∑( p ijr− t ijr)2 (9)
relatively darker than the cheekbone area (including r = ν ijr
nose) ( c S ) as shown in Fig. 2 (c), where
S = S + S + S
e b1 b2 b3
The processing flow of Real-Time face detection
S = S + S + S
c b4 b5 b6
system is shown in Fig. 4.
Then,
S < S
e c (7)
When expression (5), (6), and (7) are all satisfied,
the center of the rectangle can be a candidate for
SSR-filter
Between-the-Eyes.
Candidate point
Stereo camera to find distance information
Between the Eyes template
Average Between-the-Eyes templates matching
Figure 3. Between-the-Eyes candidates from SSR
filter
In Fig.3 (b), the Between-the-Eyes candidate area
Eyes detection
is displayed as the white areas and the non-
candidate area is displayed as the black part. By
performing labeling process on Fig. 3 (b), the result
of using SSR filter to detect Between-the-Eyes Between -the – Eyes point detection
candidates is shown.
Because the SSR filter extracts not only the true
Between-the- Eyes but also some false candidates, Figure 4. Processing Flow of Real-Time Face
so we use the average Between-the-Eyes template Detection
matching technique to solve this problem.
After extracting the templates, we pass them to the
To evaluate the candidates, we define the Between support vector machine in order to classify them.
the- Eyes pattern as p mn (m=0,...,31, n = 0, ...., 15) . Positive classification results mean true faces, while
150 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
negative ones mean false faces. Since the program In vertical intensity profiles we add horizontally to
will be used by one person at a time, we need to each column the values of the columns that
pick one of the positive results as the final detected precedes it in the ROI the same as in the horizontal
face. To achieve that, we pick the highest positive profile, the values accumulate faster at the nose tip
result, but before doing so, we will multiply each position so the maximum value gives us the ‘y’
positive result by the area of the cluster that its coordinate of the nose tip. From both, the horizontal
template represents. and vertical profiles we were able to locate the nose
tip position.
Finding the Nose Tip
After locating the eyes, the final step is to find the
nose tip. From figure 5 we can see that the blue line
defines a perfect square of the pupils and outside
corners of the mouth; the nose tip should fall inside
this square, so this square becomes our region of
interest in finding the nose tip.
Figure 5 The square that forms the ROI
The nose tip has a convex shape so it collects more
light than other features in the ROI because it is Figure 7: Horizontal Sums of the columns
closer to the light source. In horizontal intensity After locating the nose bridge we need to find the
profiles we add vertically to each line the values of nose tip on that bridge. Since each NBP represents
the lines that precedes it in the ROI, so since that the brightest S2 sector on the line it belongs to, and
the nose bridge is brighter than the surrounding that S2 sector contains the accumulated vertical sum
features the values should accumulate faster at the of the intensities in that sector from the first line to
bridge location; in other words the maximum value the line it belongs to, we will be using this
of the horizontal profile gives us the ‘x’ coordinate information to locate the nose tip. Nose trills are
of the nose tip. dark areas, and the portion that they add to the
accumulated sum in the horizontal profile is smaller
than the contribution of other areas; in other words
each NBP will add with its S2 sector a certain
amount to the accumulated sum in the horizontal
profile, but the NBP at the nose trills location will
add a smaller amount, we will notice a local minima
at the nose trills location, by locating this local
minima we take the NBP that corresponds to it as
the nose trills location, and the next step is to look
for the nose tip above the nose trills. Since the nose
Figure 6:The horizontal profile of ROI
tip is brighter than other features it will donate with
its S2 sector to the accumulated sum more than
151 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
other NBPs, which means a local maxima in the transform gives several lines so we approximate
first derivate, so the location of the nose tip is the them to a final line which is the eye brow.
location of the NBP that corresponds to the local
Motion Detection
maxima that is above the local minima in the first
derivate. Tracking the nose tip will be achieved by To detect motion in a certain region we subtract the
template matching inside the ROI. pixels in that region from the same pixels of the
previous frame, and at a given location (x,y); if the
absolute value of the subtraction was larger than a
certain threshold, we consider a motion at that pixel.
Blink Detection
We apply blink detection in the eye’s ROI before
finding the eye’s new exact location. The blink
detection process is run only if the eye is not
moving, because when a person uses the mouse and
wants to click, he moves the pointer to the desired
location, stops, and then clicks, so basically the
same for using the face, the user moves the pointer
with the tip of the nose, stops, then blinks. To detect
a blink we apply motion detection in the eye’s ROI;
if the number of motion pixels in the ROI is larger
Figure 8:The final result of the face and eye
than a certain threshold we consider that a blink was
detection process
detected, because if the eye is still, and we are
Hough Transform detecting a motion in the eye’s ROI, that means that
the eyelid is moving which means a blink. In order
The Hough transform is a technique which can be
to avoid multiple blinks detection while they are a
used to isolate features of a particular shape within
single blink (because motion pixels will appear
an image. In our proposal we use this to find our
while the eye is closing and reopening), the user can
eye brows. The classical Hough transform is most
set the blink’s length, so all blinks which are
commonly used for the detection of regular curves
detected in the period of the first detected blink are
such as lines, circles, ellipses, etc.
omitted.
The Hough transform can be used to identify the
IV Conclusion
parameter of a curve which best fits a set of given
edge points. This edge description is commonly The proposed system is the best system for the
obtained from a feature detecting operator such as users to play games interactively. The automatic
the Roberts Cross, Sobel or Canny edge detector initialization phase is greatly simplified in this
and may be noisy, i.e. it may contain multiple edge system, with no loss of accuracy in locating the
fragments corresponding to a single whole feature. user’s eyes and choosing a suitable open eye
Furthermore, as the output of an edge detector template. Another improvement in this system is, it
defines only where features are in an image, the is compatible with inexpensive USB cameras, as
work of the Hough transform is to determine both opposed to the high- resolution cameras. The
what the features are (i.e. to detect the feature(s) for experiments indicate that the system performs
which it has a parametric (or other) description) and equally well in extreme lighting conditions. The
how many of them exist in the image. To find the accuracy percentages in all the cases were
eyebrow line from the set of thresholding points we approximately the same as those that were retrieved
apply the Hough transform. Sometimes Hough in normal lighting conditions.
152 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,
Vol. 7, No. 1, 2010
Another important consideration is the placement AUTHORS PROFILE
and orientation of camera. The experiments showed
She has completed her Bachelor of
that placing the camera below the user’s head
engineering in Computer Science
resulted in desirable functioning of the system.
from Raja Rajeswari engineering
However, if the camera is placed too high above the
College,Anna University and
user’s head, in such a way that it is aiming down at
Master of Engineering from P.S.N.A
the user at a significant angle, the blink detection is
Engineering college ,Anna
no longer as accurate. This is caused by the very
University.She is currently doing her Ph.D in
small amount of variation in correlation scores as
Bharath University.Her research interest includes
the user blinks, since nearly all that is visible to the
image processing,computer vision and database
camera is the eyelid of the user. Thus, when
management systems.
positioning the camera, it is beneficial to the
detection accuracy to maximize the degree of
Dr.S.K.Srivatsa was born at
variation between the open and closed eye images
Bangalore on 21st July 1945.He
of the user.Higher frame rates and finer camera
received his Bachelor of Electronics
resolutions could lead to more robust eye detection
and Telecommunication
that is less restrictive on the user, while increased
Engineering degree (Honors) from
processing power could be used to enhance the
Jadavpur University(securing first
tracking algorithm to more accurately follow the
rank and two medals).Master degree in Electrical
user’s eye and recover more gracefully when it is
Commuication Engineering(With distinction)from
lost.
Indian Institute of Science and Ph.D also from
REFERENCES
Indian Institute of Scienc,Bangalore.In July 2005,he
1.M. Bartlett, G. Littlewort, B. Braathen, T. Sejnowski,
retired as professor of Electronics engineering from
and J. Movellan. A prototype for automatic recognition
Anna University.He has taught twenty-two different
of Spontaneous facial actions. In S. Becker, S. Thrun,
Courses at P.G level during the last 33 years.He has
and K. Obermayer, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 15, pages 1271– functioned as a Member of the Board of studies in
1278, 2003. some Educational Institutions.His name is included
2. T. N. Bhaskar, F. T. Keat, S. Ranganath, and Y.V.
in the Computer Society of India database of
Venkatesh.Blink detection and eye tracking for eye
Resource professionals.He has received about a
localization. In Proc. TENCON 2003, volume 2, pages 821–
dozen awards.He has produced 24 Ph.Ds.He is the
824, 2003.
3. A. Haro, M. Flickner, and I. Essa. Detecting and author of well over 400 publications.
tracking eyes by using their physiological properties, .
dynamics, and appearance. In IEEE International
Dr.M.Uma maheswari received her
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
bachelor of science in Computer
volume 1, pages 163–168,2000.
Science from Bharathidasan
4.Q. Ji, H. Wechsler, A. Duchowski, and M. Flickner.
Editorial: special issue: eye detection and tracking. university in 1995, Master of
Comput.Vis.Image Underst., 98(1):1–3, 2005. Computer Applications in
5.D. G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant Computer Sience from
keypoints. Int. J. of Computer Vision, 60(2):91–110, 2004.
Bharathidasan University
6. M. Valstar, M. Pantic, Z. Ambadar, and J. Cohn.
in1998,M.Phil in Computer Science from Alagappa
Spontaneous vs. posed facial behavior: Automatic analysis of
brow actions. In Int. Conf. on Multimodal Interfaces, pages University,Karaikudi in 2005,Master of Technology
162–170, 2006. in Computer Science from Mahatma Gandhi Kasi
Vidyapeeth university in 2005 and Ph.D in
Computer Science from Magadh Universty,Bodh
Gaya in 2007.She has 10 years of teahing
experience and guided 150 M.C.A projects,23
M.Tech projects and 6 Ph.D research works.
153 http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/
ISSN 1947-5500
