Why Data Science Projects Fail
UnderstandingofDataScienceProjectfailureandreasoning
Balaram Panda
Software Engineering
University of Auckland
Auckland, New Zealand
bpan575@aucklanduni.ac.nz
Abstract—DataScienceisamodernDataIntelligencepractice, of CRISP-DM. CRISP-DM developed during 90’s, and since
which is the core of many businesses and helps businesses build then,componentsofDataSciencehaveevolvedalotinregards
smart strategies around to deal with businesses challenges more
to the way data is collected, volume, velocity, and variety
efficiently.DataSciencepracticealsohelpsinautomatingbusiness
of the information being analyzed(big data [24]), processing
processes using the algorithm, and it has several other benefits,
which also deliver in a non-profitable framework. In regards methodology, algorithms, and outcome delivery. Hence it is
to data science, three key components primarily influence the crucial to understand in detail the current day’s Data Science
effective outcome of a data science project. Those are challenges, deep dive into the reasoning of failures, and find
1) Availability of Data out the best practice. Data Science is an evolving field, and
2) Algorithm
lots have been changed since last decade in regards to various
3) Processing power / infrastructure
keys areas, such as data collection, big data processing on
In today’s technology world, there is no limitation on data as
cloud and/or parallel or distributed processing framework,
well as processing power, and we have a much more efficient
algorithm to produce the desired output. In spite of the success evolutionofnewalgorithm,datavisualization,deploymentand
of Data Science projects, many Data Science projects still fail productionizingDataSciencesolutionsasadigitalproductetc.
and are unable to produce the desired outcome. In this paper, Thereareseveralchallengesinthosekeyareas;asanexample,
we have explored the bottleneck of Data Science projects and
because of big data, the Data Science project collects lots
provided some recommendations to make data science projects
of irrelevant and uncleaned data. Sometimes the intermediate
moresuccessful.StandardDataScienceprojectdevelopmentlife-
cycle CRISP-DM [1] is old in this agile development [31] world, data source doesn’t have the correct business logic, which is
and but most Data Science practices still follow CRISP-DM. mapped to the business objective of the data science project.
In general, Data Scientist analyses scenarios where a predictive “big data brings lots of “big errors” in data quality and data
modelormachinelearningmodelmightfail.Butthisstudyisto
usage,whichcannotbeusedasasubstituteforsoundresearch
analyze when and why the Data Science project fails despite
design and solid theories.” [4] Data quality is one of the com-
an excellent model. Data Science is a diverse field. It needs
technical as well as business knowledge to deliver a project. mon challenges in the Data Science Project. Another major
Hence,tounderstandwhytheDataScienceprojectfails,weneed challenge is domain understanding, and many times domain
to understand challenges from the business side and technical understandingisabottleneckforDataScienceprojectsuccess.
side.
Also, in many cases, data science issues are seen differently
1) Technical perspective
and vary from one domain to another, stakeholder view and
2) Business leader perspective or stakeholder perspective
data scientist view. As mentioned by Dr.Om Deshmukh [9] ”
Also,ithasbeenobservedthatthesuccessoftheDatascience
DataScienceprojectsuccessalsodependsonwhatstakeholder
projectdependsonbusinessdomain.Examplemarketpropensity
model, a strategic market campaign method, is more successful knows about the expected outcome of the data science project
inanyretailusecasethanafraudanalyticmodelinthebanking and how effectively stakeholder expectations being managed
fraud domain. So domain agnostic framework was implemented thougheffectivthroughunication.”DataScienceprojectsstrug-
inthisresearchtomakethisresearchindependentofthebusiness
gles with these types of challenges and more other challenges
domain.
Index Terms—Software Engineering, Data Science, Machine in industry settings, but not enough research has been done
Learning, CRISP-DM in this space to highlight those problems and their possible
solutions. For better quality research in this domain, years of
I. INTRODUCTION
experienceintheDataSciencefieldandrole/designationlevel
Data Science is comparable to applied research. Often in diversityindatascienceprojectssuchaskeystakeholdersand
research, there are lots of repetitive processes to be followed data scientists have been included.
until it generates the desired outcome. Similarly, data science Wepreparedalistofquestionsandinterviewedexperienced
processes are often repetitive until they meet the business Data Scientists, Senior Leader who actively manage data
objectives. Those business objectives are set during the re- science and data analytic team, and stakeholders part of data
peatedBusinessUnderstandingandDataUnderstandingphase science projects, in a motivation to understand the perception
3202
guA
8
]GL.sc[
1v69840.8032:viXra
on data science project failure. Then did the thematic analysis TABLEI
to analyze and draw conclusions from data. Then came up LISTOFINTERVIEWCANDIDATES
with the most popular theme by thoroughly analyzing the
YearOf GroupAor Business Working
ID
discussion. Experience GroupB Domain Geography
In this research, we have discovered and highlighted the ITand
C1 5+ GroupA USA
Consulting
key challenging areas where Data Science practice and Data
Bankingand
scientists should focus. Also, some suggestions on tackling C2 10+ GroupB NZ
Finance
those challenges. Also, we came up with a state of art Software
C3 10+ GroupA India
framework to tackle those challenges in efficient ways. Product
C4 1+ GroupA Research NZ
Software
II. RESEARCHMETHODOLOGY C5 5+ GroupB Canada
Product
A. Research methodology C6 10+ GroupB ITServiceand India
Consulting
In this research Interview based semi-structured Qualitative Bankingand
C7 10+ GroupB NZ
Finance
research methodology [8] have been used.
Software
C8 5+ GroupA USA
Product
B. Interview Design
C9 10+ GroupB Consulting NZ
In this research the objective is also to capture the diversity
in regards to the people involved in a data science project
Group A: Data Scientist with some years of experience
such as Data Scientist and business owner and/or data science
working in Data Science project
capabilityleaderand/orstakeholder.Henceforbetteroutcome,
Group B: Business owner / leader / stakeholder
two types of interview questions have prepared
Group A: Data Scientist with some years of experience E. Research Questions
working in Data Science project Group A Questions
Group B: Business owner / leader / stakeholder
1) What are the key reasons for a Data Science project
The interviews had done via zoom software. During the in- success as per your experience
terview,answersandkeypointswerecaptured.Also,interview 2) WhatarekeyreasonsforDataScienceprojectfailureas
voice recording has been stored in google drive for reference. per your experience
3) What steps Data Science should follow to match user
C. Candidate selection for interview and Sample Diversity
expectations? Can you refer to any specific project and
Interview candidates contacted via reference and explain it in detail?
Linkedin(professional networking website). Manually 4) How stakeholder can contribute towards Data Science
reviewed their background and put them into the Group project success, and how important is it?
A or Group B Category based on their experience. Some 5) How value measured in the Data Science project and
candidates were also selected through reference. While who are involved and what are the challenges? Any
selecting a reference candidate, Snowball technique [5] had example based on a specific project?
been used to select the reference candidate. Snowball helped 6) Do you think infrastructure is a challenge for any data
to capture unbiased interviews candidate samples. During the science project?
selection process, candidates domain experience deiversity 7) How important Data Quality is for Data Science
such as Banking and finance, Retail, Software Product, IT projects?
Services,Telecommunicationetc.hadbeenconsidered.Inthis 8) What are the hindrances to maintaining data quality?
research the objective also is to add domain diversity so that 9) What are the solutions to overcome those hindrances?
Data Science problems can be viewed from a normalized and 10) What testing approaches do you take to test the model
generic approach. Also to capture more diversity candidate based on business user expectations?
selected from various geography such as India, USA, Canada 11) Some detailed discussion on failure mentioned in open
in addition to New Zeland. ended. Like how to solve model explainability? Is there
any approach you followed, or can you suggest from
D. Preparation of research Questions
your experience how to maintain model explainability
In first iteration a list of questions has been prepared from and without compromising the model accuracy?
prior knowledge and after going through literature review 12) Does the level of competencies affect project outcome
papers [10] [11] [12] Then questions are discussed with the and how to solve that?
researchsupervisor.Basedonthediscussionfewquestionsare 13) How often do Data Science projects productionize and
added, and a few are modified. A final list of questions has the pitfalls you experienced during productionization ?
been prepared and shared with the supervisor in the second 14) Many Data Science projects help automate the existing
iteration. Then after 2nd interview, 2 more questions were process;whatarethechallengesyoufaceduringknowl-
added to make the interview more target-oriented. edge elicitation from business users in those cases?
15) How challenging is change management in Data Sci- interview. Also, note has been taken during the interview.
ence? The code generation to theme generation is described in the
16) TherearelimitationsofDatausabilityduetogovernance following Theme Generation section and the write-up step
restriction? How often do you see this as a limitation, mentioned in the result section.
and how do you solve these?
H. Theme Generation
InGroupA,questionsfrom1to6areopenendedquestions
and 6 to 16 are focused questions. There are various orientations in thematic analytic men-
Group B Questions tioned in [26], [27]. In this research, we have used a com-
bination of the Inductive and Deductive approaches. We have
1) What are the essential things Data Scientists must do to
prior knowledge from experience and literature review; based
make a Data Science project successful?
on that, questions have been prepared on the most common
2) What is your view on Stakeholder’s contribution to a
issues that have been known so far. After the interview, get
Data Science project?
to know more new issues that the Data Science project is
3) What are the critical gaps between a successful
experiencing and solutions around how to tackle that. After
and unsuccessful Data Science Project from stake-
the interview, we had iterate over the recordings, list down
holder/business owner’s perspective?
all the key issues that experts mentioned in the interview,
4) What improvement do you want to make towards the
and mapped that to the questions. Then cluster those issues
traditional Data Science approach to make it more
together to identify the common themes in those issues. In
valuable for business?
addition to the theme, we also got solutions and workaround
5) How important change management is for a Data Sci-
to tackle those issues.
enceProject?Anysuggestionstomakechangemanage-
ment successful?
III. RESULTS
6) Data Science projects have lots of intangible benefits;
how do you create value metrics for Data Science
TABLEII
projects? How often are you able to achieve that?
RESULTEDTHEMES
7) Do you follow any ROI metrics for Data Science
projects? (question 6 extension) Questions Keyconcerns
for
8) HowdoyoudefineaDataScienceprojectdifferentfrom Themes wherethemes
DataSciecne
werefound
a Business Intelligence project? (Optional question) ProjectSuccess
EffectiveStakeholder
AQ4,AQ10,BQ1,BQ2 Yes
F. Interview Process and Data Collection Managment
ClarityinBusiness
Interviewer contacted via Linked-in and via emails. Once AQ1,BQ6,AQ2 Yes
problemunderstanding
they confirmed their participation, the consent document was DataqualityIssues AQ7,AQ2,AQ9 Yes
shared, and formal consent approval was taken before the Modeldeployment AQ3,AQ6,AQ13,BQ3 Yes
andproductionzaiton
interview. Interviews are done via Zoom and in-person meet-
Departmentlevel
ings. During the interview, answers and critical points has intigrationwhile BQ3,BQ5 Yes
beencaptured.Also,interviewvoicerecordinghasbeenstored productionizingthemodel
ChangeManagment AQ15,BQ5 No
in google drive for reference. Only the question-answer part
Datagovernanceroadblocker AQ17 No
of the interview has been recorded. In an average interview,
only the question-answer part lasted for 30 minutes. For the
introduction, including research motivation, we spent around A. Effective Stakeholder Management:
8 to 10 minutes in each interview.
Stakeholders are the people representing a department or
G. Data Understanding and Analysis owning a business product or a group of people who benefit
from a project’s success. In Data Science, Stakeholder can
Thematic analysis [6] has been used to analysis the data.
be business process owner or product owner or end-user who
Thematicanalyticisapopularmethodforqualitativeresearch.
is going to use the Data science outcome or product. Many
As suggested by Braun and Clark [30] there are 6 steps of
participants mentioned how crucial it is to communicate and
thematic analyses as follows
manage Stakeholder effectively. C1 also mentioned that data
Step 1: Become familiar with the data scientists need to communicate well across different project
Step 2: Generate initial codes stakeholders likeproject managers, businessstakeholders, and
Step 3: Search for themes dataengineers.”Stakeholdersshouldshareequalresponsibility
Step 4: Review themes as data scientist to make the project successful” - C1. But
Step 5: Define themes often, stakeholders may not be available all the time as they
Step 6: Write-up have other priorities. Also its often found the there is a gap
As the questions were designed before the interviews and whatStakeholderthinksaboutDataSciencecansolvevswhat
interview, we familiarised ourselves with the data during the data science can actually solve for business.
C1 mentioned that from her experience, she found that model should be integrated into a real-time environment, that
data science projects are more likely to successful where data mightbecometricky.Thatrequiteasoftwareengineeringskill,
scientist and stake holder work together towards a common also the key thing is to how a model file can be integrated
business goal. C2 mentioned that Stakeholder should take in the existing programming environment. These things need
equal responsibilities as data scientist to make the Data Sci- to be plan ahead before the project starts during the business
ence project successful. understandingandplanningphase.Basedonthecomplexityof
[13] Data science teams often struggle to use their model implementationprojectkick-off.Ifitsisfeasibletoimplement,
into business processes. Also stakeholders often can’t artic- then the production implementation plan need to be discussed
ulate the problems they are aiming to solve. [13] there is a andagreedwiththestakeholderatthebeginningoftheproject.
significant gap between stakeholder and data science teams
E. Department level Collaboration:
that needs to be recognized and addressed. [13] suggest data
science need to bridge the gap between an organizational Several group B candidates highlighted that cross depart-
structure and leadership commitment to develop better com- ment collaboration is one of the major challenges while
munication, processes, and gain trust among all stakeholders. delivering the Data Science outcome. Many times model
outperform and implementation done but due to lack in
B. Business Problem Understanding:
department level integration project may not be useful for the
All the participants mentioned that Business problem un- organization.Exampleamarketpropensitymodelcanproduce
derstanding is the most critical step in a data science project. most accurate target customer, but that need to integrated in
Business problem understanding with effective stakeholder themarketingchannel.Eventhoughitsintegrated,theforntline
communicationimprovesthesuccesscriteriaofadatascience channel might de-prioritize the request due to some other
project. During the business problem understanding process, priority they are having. These situation are out of control
thedatascienceteamgetsanoverviewofthebusinessprocess of a Data Science and Stakeholder.
and tries to articulate the problem that the business is trying
F. Change Management:
to solve. It helps the data science team get more clarity
around the business objective, business process, and some Most of the data science project are either used for strategy
understanding of data. Then Data Science team prepares the or time saving or cost saving using automation to reduce
plan to check for data availability. This also helps define the manual effort. Sometimes this creates resistance from the
target variable or dependent variable in the case of a super- people affected. Several candidates from group B mentioned
vised modeling approach. In this process Data Science team that Change Management is one of the challenge in any data
understands the business problem well; more accurately and science implementation. But this is not the key challenge as
define the business objective and target/dependent/outcome therearestrategytotackleit.Alsofewparticipantsmentioned
variable for the predictive model or another type of modeling thatthesolutionforthechangemanagementsometimesoutof
task. More accurately, the outcome variable is defined, more control of Data Science team. As suggested by C2 ”Change
chances of success of the data science project. management specialized area and need specialized people to
handle such things.”
C. Data Quality issues:
”Change management is not a key challenge” -C3. May
Data quality issue another common issue which came out be because he is working in google where automation using
as a theme. Most participants from group a mentioned about algorithm is always promoted.
Data Quality issue. Also they mentioned most teams don’t To handle change management, ”DS team need to engage
want to spend much time on fixing data quality issues and with the team going to affect very early and try to gain
focusingmoreondeliverable,whichcanbemeasured.Because confidencefromtheteamaffectedbyillustratinganexplaining
the time spend is not mapped to any tangible benefit at this how this is going to improve their work” - C1.
stage. So the idea is to create something which can be used
G. Data Governance:
for multiple projects. Example the DW(Data Warehousing)
and Cube concept got more attention when BI (Business Data governance processes, roles, policies and standard are
Intelligence)generatevaluefororganisationandBI/DWteam getting more stronger after GDPR(General Data Protection
started creating something which can be reused for many Regulation) [21] law. ”Around 30% of data science projects
different projects. unable to go to production due to Data Governance rules”
C3. Same issues due to data governance also mentioned by
D. Model Deployment and Production:
various other participants from group A and Group B. Data
Several participants from group A and group B, described governanceisamusthavestandardforanyorganizationusing
thatmanyDataScienceprojectisnotdeployableorfaileddue data as a asset. But to avoid data science project late failure,
to complexity in productionzing the model or the outcome. data governance team engagement need to be discussed at the
Example an antivirus software company built a predictive early stage of the project. So that Data governance team can
model build with 99.1% accuracy on test data. No doubt that advise on alternate solution to get the data, or they can advise
is a that is one of the best model, but if the expectation is nottooptforthisprojectduetothedatausedinDataScience
project are not meeting the governance standard. In addition Another key challenge most data scientists mention is that
to that organisation need to adopt PII (personal identifiable most projects struggle to articulate the business problem well
information) masking approaches to mask the data. enough.Businessproblemunderstandingisnoteasy;itusually
happens with stakeholders, business subject matter experts,
IV. DISCUSSIONANDRECOMMENDATIONS
andthedatascienceteam.Thisisn’teasybecauseitrequiresa
There are the top 7 themes generated [Table II] in this substantial amount of prior business knowledge to understand
research. More emphasis was given to Effective Stakeholder the business objective clearly. Another challenge sometimes it
management, Most of the interview participants mentioned is hard to define a uniform business process or rule even in
the challenges during stakeholder management, and few men- the same department. For example, in a credit risk modeling
tioned that stakeholder management is not that challenging. scenario, the objective is to identify the risky customer based
Also, business leaders who sometimes act as stakeholders on historical default customer data. But defining a default
(in our interview panel) also agreed that there is a gap in customersometimesvariesfromonebusinessSMEtoanother
understandingthedatascienceprocessfromastakeholderlens. businessSME.SomeSMEscandefineacustomerasadefault
Usually, Data science projects have more than one stake- customer if someone has not made the payment 60 days after
holder. In this multi-stakeholder environment, it’s always the due date. In some cases, SME may consider 90 days or
good to have a strategy around stakeholder management. The sometimes 1st-time defaulter is not true defaulter as 1st time
stakeholder can have different types of posture [15] based on can be due to negligence or due to some mistake. So it’s
the RDAP(reactive, defensive, accommodative, or proactive) critical to understand the business problem definition clearly
strategy(tableFig2).ThesamecanbeappliedtoDataScience and once you get some level of understanding, validate that
projects. As C2 mentioned, stakeholders should share equal understanding in a meeting with business SME. Sometimes
responsibility. Hence for a successful data science project, stakeholder comes from a mindset predictive model or ma-
the strategy should be Accommodative or Proactive where chine learning a solution to any type of business problem.
stakeholder postures are Accept responsibility and Anticipate In some cases, it is true, but the definition of the business
responsibility,respectively,asdescribedinfig1.Buttodothat ruleshouldbeclearenoughtomakeanyDataScienceproject
as suggested by few candidated, every Data Science project successful.[13]stakeholdersaresometimesnotsurewhatthey
should have top management buying to make the DS project want. This usually happens in business strategy projects. In
successful. thisbusinessunderstandingprocess,Datascientistsshouldalso
take the opportunity to help refine the stakeholder objective
in several meetings. But often, business understanding is not
given priority because of the following reason.
1) Stakeholder and Data scientist are both very excited to
start working on the project
2) Data scientists cannot ask the right questions initially
due to a lack of domain knowledge. So to solve this
issue, business SME and Data Scientists should spend a
good amount of time articulating the business problem
clearly.
AnotherchallengeinDataSciencewefoundfromthisresearch
is that the data quality. Data quality has always been an issue.
Spending a good amount of time on fixing Data Quality is
always difficult because effort/time to value mapping in data
qualityframeworkisalwaysmissing.Hencefixingdataquality
is never get prioritized. To understand data quality, we need
to understand what data quality means. Data quality has three
dimensions as mentioned in [20].
Fig.1. StakeholderManagementstrategy[15]
1) Accuracy : Are the data free of error ?
2) Consistency in Timeliness : Are the data up-to-date ?
Sometimes these postures of stakeholders due to the nature
3) Completeness : Are necessary data present ?
of the organization of the nature of data science application.
Sometimes the posture varies at the department level, even Reasons: Data Quality issues arise due to three main rea-
in the same organization. Example in a Banking and finance sons.
business posture of the same stakeholder may vary from a 1) Standardized Data collection process across organiza-
Credit Risk project to a pure customer marketing project. tion margin someone’s in saying about group Simpson
Hencestakeholdercommunicationandmanagementshouldbe someone’s in a number of energy
strategic, and one strategy can’t be generalized for all data 2) Error due to human or software
science projects. 3) Error in business logic to process the data
Solution we proposed to fix data quality : the early phase of the project. By combining all, we are
1) Better data collection standard from application level proposing a new Data Science methodology called HYBRID
data generation CRISP DS(Hybrid Cross Industry Standard Process for Data
2) Centralized data store : An organization needs to spend Science),whichwilltakecareofalltheabovehindrancesand
time building a feature store with the help of a robust make Data Science project less prone to failure.
data pipeline. The objective of the feature store is to Following figure-II represents HYBRID-CRISP-DS.
create a dataset which can be of high quality and useful
for various DS projects. Ideally the team should list
down all the possible DS projects and start mapping
the possible features/ data which need to be created.
Anotherkeyissueidentifiedfromthisresearchisthelackof
department-levelcollaboration,leadingtolow-valueoutcomes.
Because the department which should use the product doesn’t
use the model as they might have other priorities to attend.
The solution is to list down all the departments going to be
affectedbythisoutcomeanddepartmentwhoaregoingtouse
the outcome and which department is going to be involved in
hostingthissolution.Thisneedtobediscussedkeepingstake-
holder in loop. After this department level engagement Data
Science team need to share the deployment plan mention how
the outcome can be deployed or reusable. Other issues such
as change management and data governance came out of the
theme are not the key bottleneck for the data science project
success.Howeveroneparticipantmentionedthat”around30%
of the time they loose the project due to data governance
and privacy limitation” - C3. The earlier Data Science assess
the data privacy and governance issues, that is better for the
project. So that Data Science can have the opportunity to
Fig.2. HYBRID-CRISP-DS
negotiate or can find other source which can be approved by
governance.
In this HYBRID-CRISP-DS methodology stakeholder and
We discussed the problems and the solution in the discus-
businessSMEalwaysbeintheloopduringthevariousphases
sionsection.Inthissection,wehavesummarizedthesolutions
of the Data Science project. As mentioned in the figure-II,
based on interviews, my knowledge, and my experience in
emphasishasbeengivenonvariableselectionafterconsulting
Data Science. Based on this research work, we would recom-
a business SME(subject matter expert), which is an iterative
mend there are three key areas where improvement needed
process. Soon after, that needs to be validated through DGP
1) Stakeholder Management (DataGovernanceandPrivacy)incollaborationwithDG(Data
2) Data Quality Governance) team. Based on the outcome from DGP, proceed
3) Durable and deployable outcome to the next step, DDP(deployment and delivery plan), or
A potential data science project might fail due to the above negotiate on variable selection for those variables rejected
reasons what we discussed so far. The Data Science team by DG. Based on the complexity of requirements in DDP
needs to have good stakeholder management skills to set the SE(software engineer) or Data engineer, dependencies will
expectation of the stakeholder at an early stage based on the be created. Once the deployment plan is ready, that needs to
business problem understanding. Also, a data scientist should be validated by stakeholders. Then, the project flows through
have the ability to highlight the potential risk ahead of time DCQ(Datacollectionandquality)tofindtherightdatasource
thatmightoccurduetodataprivacyand/ordatasecurityand/or andfixthequalityissueswhereneeded.AfterDCQ,nextisto
datagovernancerestrictions.Also,Datascientistsshouldhave prepare the data, will follow through with model building and
visibilityoftheriskoffailureduetofactorssuchasdataqual- validation. Then the emphasis is given to outcome validation
ityissuesand/ordeploymentlimitationsduetothecomplexity by the business user. The accuracy of a predictive model or
of the software platform and/or IT infrastructure. To create any unsupervised model may not make sense to the business.
a fail-proof data quality management for the Data Science Businesses should always test the model with live data or any
project, the Data Science team needs to spend dedicated time validation data on which businesses can rely upon. Once the
checkingthedataqualityandplantoengagethedataengineer business is satisfied with the outcome, then the project moves
to improve the data quality standard. Also, to validate the to deployment. Once the project is deployed, a proper drift
requirement with stakeholder Data Scientist need to build a monitoring technique is implemented to monitor the drift in
deployment plan ahead and share it with the stakeholder in an automated fashion.
V. FUTUREWORK [6] @articlebraun2012thematic, title=Thematic analysis., author=Braun,
VirginiaandClarke,Victoria,year=2012,publisher=AmericanPsycho-
Althoughseveralindustryexpertsandresearcherssuggested logicalAssociation
alternate approaches to CRISP-DM such as TDSP(team data [7] M.Young,TheTechnicalWriter’sHandbook.MillValley,CA:Univer-
sityScience,1989.
science process) by Microsoft [25] SEMMA(Sampling, Ex-
[8] @articledicicco2006qualitative, title=The qualitative research inter-
ploring, Modifying, Modeling, and Assessing) by SAS [28], view, author=DiCicco-Bloom, Barbara and Crabtree, Benjamin F,
eachcomeswiththelimitation.HYBRID-CRISP-DSisanew journal=Medical education, volume=40, number=4, pages=314–321,
year=2006,publisher=WileyOnlineLibrary
approach that came out of this research. In the future, this
[9] https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2019/08/data-science-leader-
approach needs to be applied and can be observed where guide-managing-stakeholders/
issues might occur while applying HYBRID-CRISP-DS in [10] Longbing Cao. 2017. Data Science: A Comprehensive Overview.
ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 3, Article 43 (October 2017), 42 pages.
real-world data science projects. In this process, the Data
DOI:https://doi-org.ezproxy.auckland.ac.nz/10.1145/3076253
Science project outcome never looked from the Data Science [11] Jordan, M. I., and T. M. Mitchell. “Machine Learning: Trends, Per-
project as a software product lens. So the testing ends in step spectives, and Prospects.” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, American
Association for the Advancement of Science, 2015, pp. 255–60,
8 of this proposed methodology after the business validates
http://www.jstor.org/stable/24748571
the modeling outcome. So the HYBRID-CRISP-DS approach [12] @inproceedingsvogelsang2019requirements, title=Requirements engi-
can be researched and analyzed further to the Data Science neering for machine learning: Perspectives from data scientists, au-
thor=Vogelsang,AndreasandBorg,Markus,booktitle=2019IEEE27th
as a product scenario, where the methodology can be slightly
InternationalRequirementsEngineeringConferenceWorkshops(REW),
different with respect to business requirement, deployment, pages=245–251,year=2019,organization=IEEE
and software product testing. In addition to that, the proposed [13] https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/to-succeed-with-data-science-first-
build-the-bridge/
HYBRID-CRISP-DS is a series of processes. Hence this
[14] https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/why-so-many-data-science-projects-
researchcanbefurtherextendedtounderstandhowHYBRID- fail-to-deliver/
CRISP-DSprocesscanbeparalleledtomaketheDataScience [15] Geunchan Lim, Hyunchul Ahn, Heeseok Lee, Formulating strategies
for stakeholder management: a case-based reasoning approach, Expert
process more efficient.
Systems with Applications, Volume 28, Issue 4, 2005, Pages 831-840,
Data Science experts participated in this interview process, utanISSN0957-4174,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2004.12.038.
not emphasizing model explainability. However, model ex- [16] Malone, K. (2020). When Translation Problems Arise Between Data
Scientists and Business Stakeholders, Revisit Your Metrics. Harvard
plainability can be a big roadblock in other domains such
DataScienceReview,2(1).https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.c2fc310d
as healthcare, critical safety environment. Even though this [17] C. Cichy and S. Rass, ”An Overview of Data Quality Frameworks,”
studyhasbeenconductedbyinterviewingexpertsfromvarious in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 24634-24648, 2019, doi: 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2019.2899751.
domainsandgeography,thisstudycanbefurtherextendedby
[18] https://hbr.org/2019/07/building-the-ai-powered-organization
including more professionals from a data science background. [19] https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1096348017753521
[20] Benjamin T. Hazen, Christopher A. Boone, Jeremy D. Ezell, L.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Allison Jones-Farmer, Data quality for data science, predictive ana-
lytics, and big data in supply chain management: An introduction
Special thanks to my supervisor Dr Kelly Blincoe (Senior to the problem and suggestions for research and applications, Inter-
national Journal of Production Economics,Volume 154, 2014, Pages
LecturerinSoftwareEngineering,UniversityofAuckland)for
72-80, ISSN 0925-5273, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.04.018.
her expert advise, guidance and excellent support during this (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925527314001339)
research. We acknowledged all the candidates ((Pragyansmita [21] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General Data Protection Regulation
[22] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-industry standard process for data mining
Nayak (C1), Confidential (C2), Mani Kanteswara Rao Gar-
[23] ftp://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss/documentation/modeler/18.0/en/ModelerCRISPDM.pdf
lapati (C3), Peter Devine (C4), Tural Gulmammadov (C5), [24] S. Sagiroglu and D. Sinanc, ”Big data: A review,” 2013 International
Suresh Bommu (C6), Confidential (C7), Siddhant Gawsane Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2013,
pp.42-47,doi:10.1109/CTS.2013.6567202.
(C8),Confidential(C9))fortheirparticipationinthisresearch
[25] https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/data-science-
interview. process/overview
[26] https://www.psych.auckland.ac.nz/en/about/thematic-analysis.html
REFERENCES [27] Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in
psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
[1] R Wirth, J Hipp, “CRISP-DM: Towards a standard process model for https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
data mining” Proceedings of the 4th international conference on the [28] http://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/emref/14.3/n061bzurmej4j3n1jnj8bbjjm1a2.htm
practicalapplicationsofknowledgediscoveryanddatamining,2000. [29] http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.58.9085&rep=rep1&type=pdf
[2] https://venturebeat.com/2019/07/19/why-do-87-of-data-science-projects- [30] @articlebraun2006using, title=Using thematic analysis in psychology,
never-make-it-into-production/ author=Braun, Virginia and Clarke, Victoria, journal=Qualitative re-
[3] https://blogs.gartner.com/andrew white/2019/01/03/our-top-data-and- searchinpsychology,volume=3,number=2,pages=77–101,year=2006,
analytics-predicts-for-2019/ publisher=Taylor&Francis
[4] JianzhengLiu,JieLi,WeifengLi,JianshengWu,Rethinkingbigdata: [31] https://agilemanifesto.org/
A review on the data quality and usage issues, ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Volume 115, 2016, Pages 134-
142, ISSN 0924-2716, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2015.11.006.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271615002567)
[5] @article10.1214/aoms/1177705148, Leo A. Goodman, Snowball Sam-
pling, volume = 32, journal = The Annals of Mathematical Statis-
tics, number = 1, publisher = Institute of Mathematical Statis-
tics, pages = 148 – 170, year = 1961, 10.1214/aoms/1177705148
https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177705148
